001|001|In the name of Allah, the Gracious, the Merciful.
001|002|Praise be to Allah, Lord of the Universes.
001|003|The Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.
001|004|Sovereign of the Day of Judgment.
001|005|It is You we worship, and You we ask for help.
001|006|Guide us along the Straight Path.
001|007|The path of those You have blessed, not of the condemned, nor of the astrayed.
002|001|Alif. Lam. Meem.
002|002|This is the Book, beyond any doubt, a guide for the righteous.
002|003|Those who believe in the unseen, perform the prayer, and spend from what We provide for them.
002|004|And those who believe in what was revealed to you, and in what was revealed before you, and are certain of the Hereafter.
002|005|These are guided by their Lord, and these are the successful.
002|006|As for those who disbelieve, whether you warn them or not, it’s the same for them; they will not believe.
002|007|Allah sealed their hearts and hearing, and over their vision is a veil. They will have a severe punishment.
002|008|Some people claim, “We believe in Allah and the Last Day,” yet they aren’t believers.
002|009|They attempt to deceive Allah and those who believe, but they only deceive themselves, and they perceive not.
002|010|There is a disease in their hearts, and Allah has increased their disease. A severe punishment awaits them because of their lies.
002|011|When they’re told, “Don’t sow corruption on earth,” they reply, “We are only reformers.”
002|012|In truth, it is they who are the corrupters, but they don’t feel it.
002|013|When they’re told, “Believe as others have believed,” they reply, “Should we believe as the irrational have believed?” In fact, it is they who are irrational, yet they are unaware.
002|014|When they encounter those who believe, they say, “We believe.” But when alone with their devils, they say, “We are really with you; we were only mocking.”
002|015|Allah mocks them and prolongs them in their transgression, wandering blindly.
002|016|These are the ones who purchased misguidance in exchange for guidance, but their trade didn’t profit them, nor are they guided.
002|017|Their situation is like that of a person who kindles a fire; when it illuminates all around him, Allah takes away their light, leaving them in utter darkness, unable to see.
002|018|Deaf, dumb, blind—they won’t return.
002|019|Or like a thunderstorm from the sky, within which are darkness, thunder, and lightning. They press their fingers into their ears against the thunderclaps, terrified of death. Allah surrounds the unbelievers.
002|020|The lightning almost takes away their sight. Whenever it illuminates for them, they walk in it; but when darkness covers them, they stand still. If Allah wills, He could take away their hearing and sight. Allah is capable of everything.
002|021|O people, worship your Lord, who created you and those before you, so that you may become righteous.
002|022|He who made the earth habitable for you, and the sky a structure, and sent down rain from the sky, thereby producing fruits for your sustenance. Don’t set up rivals to Allah while you know.
002|023|If you doubt what We revealed to Our servant, produce a chapter like it, and call upon your witnesses, other than Allah, if you are indeed truthful.
002|024|But if you don’t—and you won’t—then beware of the Fire, whose fuel is people and stones, prepared for the unbelievers.
002|025|Give good news to those who believe and do righteous deeds, that they’ll have gardens through which rivers flow. Whenever they are given fruits from there as sustenance, they will say, “This is what we were given before,” they will be given things in resemblance. Therein, they will have purified spouses and dwell there forever.
002|026|Allah is not shy to illustrate an example—whether it is of a mosquito or something larger than it. Those who believe know that it’s the truth from their Lord. But those who disbelieve question, “What could Allah mean by this example?” Through it, He misguides many and guides many. However, He misguides only the wrongdoers.
002|027|Those who violate Allah’s covenant after its ratification, cut what Allah commanded to be joined, and spread corruption on earth—these are the losers.
002|028|How can you disbelieve in Allah, when you were lifeless, then He gave you life, then He will cause you to die, then He will bring you back to life, and then to Him you will be returned?
002|029|It is He who created everything on earth for you, then He turned towards the sky and formed them into seven heavens. He is fully aware of everything.
002|030|When your Lord said to the angels, “I am placing a successor on earth,” they questioned, “Will You place in it one who will spread corruption and shed blood, while we glorify You with praises and sanctify You?” He answered, “I know what you don’t know.”
002|031|He taught Adam the names—all of them. Then He presented them to the angels, and said, “Tell me the names of these, if you are truthful.”
002|032|They replied, “Glory be to You; we have no knowledge, except what You taught us. It is You who is the Knowing, the Wise.”
002|033|Then He said, “O Adam, inform them of their names.” When he had done so, He said, “Didn’t I say to you that I know the unseen aspects of the heavens and the earth, and that I know what you disclose and what you conceal?”
002|034|And when We said to the angels, “Prostrate yourselves before Adam,” they all did, except Iblis. He refused, was arrogant, and became one of the ungrateful.
002|035|We said, “O Adam, dwell, you and your wife, in Paradise, and eat freely from it wherever you wish, but don’t approach this tree, else you become wrongdoers.”
002|036|But Satan made them slip from it and got them evicted from where they were. We said, “Descend; some of you will be enemies to others. On earth, you’ll have settlement and sustenance for a time.”
002|037|Then Adam received words from his Lord, and He accepted his repentance. He is the Acceptor of Repentance, the Merciful.
002|038|We said, “Descend from it, all of you. When guidance comes to you from Me, those who follow My guidance will neither fear nor grieve.
002|039|But those who disbelieve and deny Our signs, they will be the dwellers of the Fire, where they will remain forever.”
002|040|O Children of Israel, remember My favor which I bestowed upon you, fulfill My covenant and I will fulfill yours, and fear only Me.
002|041|Believe in what I revealed, which confirms what you already possess. And don’t be the first to reject it, nor sell My revelations for a trivial price, and revere only Me.
002|042|Don’t mix the truth with falsehood, nor knowingly conceal the truth.
002|043|Establish prayer, give the purifying charity, and bow down with those who bow down.
002|044|Do you command people to righteousness, yet forget yourselves, even while you read the Scriptures? Don’t you understand?
002|045|And seek help through patience and prayer. But it’s difficult, except for the humble.
002|046|Those who are certain they will meet their Lord and return to Him.
002|047|O Children of Israel, remember My favor that I granted you, and how I preferred you over the worlds.
002|048|And fear a Day when no soul will avail another, nor will intercession be accepted from it, nor will compensation be accepted from it, nor will they be helped.
002|049|Recall when We saved you from Pharaoh’s people, who inflicted upon you grievous suffering, slaughtering your sons while sparing your women. In that was a severe trial from your Lord.
002|050|And when We parted the sea for you, We rescued you and drowned Pharaoh’s people while you watched.
002|051|We summoned Moses for forty nights, and in his absence, you took to worshiping the calf and were wrongdoers.
002|052|Yet, We pardoned you afterwards so that you might be grateful.
002|053|We gave Moses the Scripture and the discernment to guide you.
002|054|Moses said to his people, “O my people, you’ve wronged yourselves by adopting the calf. So repent to your Maker and kill yourselves; this is better for you before your Maker.” Then, He accepted your repentance. He is the Acceptor of Repentance, the Merciful.
002|055|When you said, “O Moses, we won’t believe you until we see Allah plainly,” a thunderbolt struck you while you watched.
002|056|After that, We revived you after your death, so that you may be grateful.
002|057|We shaded you with the clouds, and We sent down manna and quails for you: “Eat from the good provisions We’ve given you.” They didn’t wrong Us, but they wronged themselves.
002|058|When We commanded, “Enter this town, and eat freely from it wherever you wish, but enter the gate humbly, and say words of humility. We will forgive your sins and will increase the good-doers.”
002|059|However, the wrongdoers among them altered the words they were given, so We sent down a scourge from the sky upon the wrongdoers for their transgressions.
002|060|And when Moses sought water for his people, We instructed, “Strike the rock with your staff.” Twelve springs gushed from it, and each tribe knew its drinking place. “Eat and drink from Allah’s provision, and don’t corrupt the earth with disobedience.”
002|061|When you said, “O Moses, we can’t endure one kind of food. So pray to your Lord for us, to produce for us earthly crops like herbs, cucumbers, garlic, lentils, and onions.” He replied, “Would you exchange something superior for something inferior? Go down to any city, and you’ll have what you requested.” They were stricken with humiliation and misery, and they incurred Allah’s wrath. This was because they rejected Allah’s signs, unjustly killed prophets, and because they disobeyed and transgressed.
002|062|Those who believe, and those who are Jewish, and the Christians, and the Sabians—whoever believes in Allah and the Last Day and acts righteously—will have their reward from their Lord. They have nothing to fear, nor will they grieve.
002|063|We made a covenant with you, as We raised the Mount above you: “Hold firmly to what We’ve given you, and remember what’s in it, so that you may become righteous.”
002|064|Yet, you turned away after that. Were it not for Allah’s grace and mercy upon you, you would’ve been among the losers.
002|065|You knew those among you who transgressed the Sabbath. We said to them, “Be apes, despised.”
002|066|So We made it an exemplary punishment for their generation and the generations to follow, and a lesson for the virtuous.
002|067|When Moses told his people, “Allah commands you to sacrifice a cow,” they replied, “Are you making fun of us?” He replied, “I seek refuge in Allah from being among the ignorant.”
002|068|They said, “Ask your Lord to clarify for us what kind.” He replied, “He says it’s a cow, not too old nor too young, but of middle age. So do what you’re commanded.”
002|069|They said, “Ask your Lord to clarify for us its color.” He replied, “He says it’s a cow, bright yellow in color, pleasing to the onlookers.”
002|070|They said, “Ask your Lord to specify for us exactly what it is, all cows are alike to us. And, if Allah wills, we will be guided.”
002|071|He replied, “He says it’s a cow not utilized for plowing or irrigating fields, flawless, with no blemish.” They said, “Now you’ve brought the truth.” So they slaughtered her, but they almost didn’t.
002|072|When you killed a person and disputed over it, Allah unveiled what you were hiding.
002|073|We commanded, “Strike him with part of it.” Thus, does Allah bring the dead to life. He shows you His signs so you may understand.
002|074|Then your hearts hardened after that, being like stones or even harder. Yet, there are stones from which rivers burst forth, and there are some that split open and water comes out, and there are some that fall down for awe of Allah. And Allah is not unaware of what you do.
002|075|Do you wish that they would believe you, when some of them heard Allah’s word, then deliberately distorted it, even after they understood it?
002|076|When they encounter those who believe, they say, “We believe.” But when alone, they question, “Will you disclose to them what Allah revealed to you so they can argue with you about it before your Lord? Don’t you understand?”
002|077|Don’t they know that Allah knows what they conceal and what they disclose?
002|078|Among them are unlettered ones who don’t know the Scripture except in wishful thinking.
002|079|Woe to those who, with their hands, write the Scripture and then claim, “This is from Allah,” to sell it for a paltry price. Woe to them for what their hands have written, and woe to them for what they’ve earned.
002|080|And they say, “The Fire won’t touch us except for a few days.” Say, “Did you receive a promise from Allah—Allah never breaks His promise—or are you saying what you don’t know about Allah?”
002|081|Those who commit sins and become besieged by their wrongdoings are the dwellers of the Fire, where they will remain forever.
002|082|However, those who believe and perform righteous deeds are the inhabitants of Paradise, where they will remain forever.
002|083|We made a covenant with the Children of Israel: “Worship none but Allah, honor your parents, relatives, orphans, and the needy. Speak kindly to people, observe the prayer, and give in charity.” Then you turned away, except for a few among you.
002|084|We took your covenant not to shed each other’s blood, nor drive out one another from your homes. You agreed and attested.
002|085|Yet, here you are, killing each other and expelling some of your own from their homes, assisting each other in sin and aggression. If they come to you as captives, you ransom them, even though it was forbidden for you to expel them. Do you believe in parts of the Scripture and reject others? What will be the reward for those among you who do so, except disgrace in this worldly life? And on Resurrection Day, they will be returned to the harshest punishment. Allah is not unaware of what you do.
002|086|These are the ones who trade the Hereafter for this worldly life. Their punishment won’t be lightened, nor will they be helped.
002|087|We gave Moses the Scripture, and followed him up with the succession of messengers. And We gave Jesus, the son of Mary, the miracles, and We strengthened him with the Holy Spirit. Is it that whenever a messenger comes to you with something that doesn’t suit your desires, you respond with arrogance, denying some and murdering others?
002|088|They say, “Our hearts are sealed.” In fact, Allah cursed them for their disbelief; they have but little faith.
002|089|When a Scripture came to them from Allah, confirming what they already had—although before they were praying for victory against those who disbelieved—when what they recognized came to them, they rejected it. So, the curse of Allah is upon the unbelievers.
002|090|How pitiful is what they sold their souls for—denying what Allah revealed, out of sheer resentment, that Allah should bestow His grace upon whom He wills of His servants. They incurred wrath upon wrath, and for the unbelievers, there is a humiliating punishment.
002|091|When they are told, “Believe in what Allah revealed,” they respond, “We believe in what was revealed to us.” Yet they deny what came after it, even though it’s the truth confirming what they have. Say, “Why, then, did you kill Allah’s prophets previously, if you are believers?”
002|092|Moses came to you with clear signs, yet you chose to worship the calf in his absence, while you were wrongdoers.
002|093|We made a covenant with you, as We raised the Mount above you, commanding, “Hold firmly to what We’ve given you, and listen.” Yet, they responded, “We hear, and we disobey.” Their hearts were soaked with the love of the calf because of their disbelief. Say, “How pitiful is what your faith compels you to do, if you are believers.”
002|094|Say, “If the Final Home with Allah is exclusively yours, with no one else included, then wish for death, if you are truthful.”
002|095|But they will never wish for it, because of what their hands have done. Allah is fully aware of the wrongdoers.
002|096|Of all people, you’ll find them most eager for life, even more so than the idolaters. Each one of them aspires to live a thousand years. Yet, a long life won’t nudge him from the punishment. Allah sees everything they do.
002|097|Say, “Whoever is an enemy to Gabriel—it was he who, by Allah’s will, brought it down upon your heart, confirming what preceded it, and providing guidance and good news for the believers.”
002|098|Whoever is an enemy to Allah, His angels, His messengers, Gabriel, and Michael—Allah is the enemy of the unbelievers.
002|099|We revealed to you clear verses, but none deny them except the sinners.
002|100|Isn’t it true that whenever they enter into a covenant, a faction among them discards it? Indeed, most of them don’t believe.
002|101|And when there came to them a Messenger from Allah, confirming what was with them, a faction of those who were given the Scripture threw the Scripture of Allah behind their backs, as though they didn’t know.
002|102|They followed what the devils attributed during Solomon’s reign. Solomon didn’t disbelieve, but the devils did. They taught people magic, and what was revealed to the two angels, Harut and Marut, in Babylon. They didn’t teach anyone without first cautioning, “We’re a test, so don’t lose faith.” They learned from them how to sow discord between a man and his wife. Yet, they can’t harm anyone without Allah’s permission. They learned what harms them and doesn’t benefit them, knowing well that whoever practices it will have no share in the Hereafter. How terrible is what they sold their souls for—if only they understood.
002|103|If they had remained faithful and righteous, a reward from Allah would’ve been far better—if only they knew.
002|104|O you who believe, don’t use words of disrespect, but speak in a manner that is honest, and listen carefully. The unbelievers will face severe punishment.
002|105|Neither the unbelievers among the People of the Scripture nor the polytheists desire any blessings for you from your Lord. However, Allah selects for His mercy whom He wills, for Allah is of boundless grace.
002|106|Whatever a verse We abrogate or cause to be forgotten, We bring a better one or similar to it. Don’t you know that Allah is capable of everything?
002|107|Don’t you know that Allah reigns over the heavens and the earth? Apart from Him, you have neither guardian nor ally.
002|108|Would you question your Messenger as Moses was questioned before? Whoever exchanges faith for disbelief has strayed from the right way.
002|109|Many among the People of the Scripture, out of envy, wish to turn you back into unbelievers after you have believed, even after the truth has become clear to them. Nevertheless, forgive and overlook until Allah brings His command. Allah has power over all things.
002|110|Establish prayer and give the purifying charity. Whatever good you put forward for yourselves, you’ll find it with Allah. Allah sees what you do.
002|111|They say, “Only Jews and Christians will enter Paradise.” These are their wishes. Say, “Present your proof, if you are truthful.”
002|112|In fact, whoever submits himself to Allah and is a doer of good will have his reward with his Lord. They will neither fear nor grieve.
002|113|The Jews say, “The Christians have no basis,” and the Christians say, “The Jews have no basis,” although they read the Scripture. Similarly, those who lack knowledge say the same. Allah will arbitrate between them on Resurrection Day concerning their disputes.
002|114|And who are more unjust than those who prevent Allah’s name from being mentioned in His mosques and strive toward their ruin? Such individuals should enter them only in fear. For them, there is disgrace in this life, and they will have a severe punishment in the Hereafter.
002|115|To Allah belong the East and the West. Wherever you turn, there is Allah’s presence. Allah is All-Encompassing, All-Knowing.
002|116|They say, “Allah has begotten a son.” Glorified is He! Rather, everything in the heavens and the earth is His; all are obedient to Him.
002|117|The Originator of the heavens and the earth; when He decrees a matter, He only says to it: ‘Be,’ and it is.
002|118|Those who don’t know ask, “Why doesn’t Allah speak to us, or give us a sign?” Those before them made the same demands. Their hearts are similar. We made the signs clear for people who have certainty.
002|119|We sent you with the truth—as a bearer of good news and a warner. You won’t be asked about the inhabitants of Hellfire.
002|120|Neither the Jews nor the Christians will approve of you until you follow their way. Say, “Allah’s guidance is the guidance.” If you were to follow their desires, after the knowledge that has come to you, you will have from Allah neither a protector nor a helper.
002|121|Those we have given the Scripture adhere to it, as it should be adhered to—these believe in it. Those who reject it are the losers.
002|122|O Children of Israel, remember My favor which I bestowed upon you, and how I favored you above all the nations.
002|123|Beware of a Day when no soul will avail another in any way, no ransom will be accepted from it, no intercession will benefit it, and they won’t be helped.
002|124|And when Abraham was tested by his Lord with commands, and he fulfilled them. He said, “I will make you a leader for the people.” He asked, “What about my descendants?” He replied, “My covenant doesn’t extend to the wrongdoers.”
002|125|We made the House as a gathering place and a sanctuary for people. And take the station of Abraham as a place of prayer. We commanded Abraham and Ishmael, “Purify My House for those who circumambulate, those who meditate, and those who kneel and prostrate.”
002|126|Abraham prayed, “My Lord, make this a secure land, and provide its people with fruits—those among them who believe in Allah and the Last Day.” He replied, “As for those who disbelieve, I will let them enjoy a little, then I will compel them to the punishment of the Fire—a terrible destination.”
002|127|When Abraham and Ishmael were raising the foundations of the House, they prayed, “Our Lord, accept this from us; You are the All-Hearing, All-Knowing.
002|128|Our Lord, make us submissive to You, and make from our descendants a nation submissive to You. Show us our rites, and accept our repentance; You are the Acceptor of Repentance, the Most Merciful.
002|129|Our Lord, raise among them a messenger from themselves, who will convey to them Your verses, teach them the Scripture and wisdom, and purify them. You are the Almighty, the Wise.”
002|130|And who would turn away from the faith of Abraham but someone who fools his own soul? We chose him in this world, and in the Hereafter, he will be among the righteous.
002|131|When his Lord said to him, “Submit,” he said, “I have submitted to the Lord of the worlds.”
002|132|Abraham instructed his sons, as did Jacob, “O my sons, Allah chose this religion for you, so don’t die except as Submitters.”
002|133|Were you witnesses when death came to Jacob, when he asked his sons, “Whom will you worship after me?” They replied, “We will worship your God and the God of your fathers, Abraham, Ishmael, and Isaac—the One God. To Him we are submitters.”
002|134|That was a community that has passed on. They will reap what they sowed, and you will reap what you sowed. You won’t be questioned about their deeds.
002|135|They say, “Be Jews or Christians, and you will be guided.” Say, “Rather, the faith of Abraham, the Monotheist, and he was not of the polytheists.”
002|136|Say, “We believe in Allah, and in what was revealed to us, and in what was revealed to Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, and the Tribes, and in what was given to Moses and Jesus, and in what was given to the prophets from their Lord. We make no distinction between any of them, and to Him we submit.”
002|137|If they believe as you believe, then they are guided. But if they turn away, they are in schism. Allah will be sufficient for you against them. He is the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing.
002|138|Allah’s coloring—what color could be superior to Allah’s? “We are worshipers of Him.”
002|139|Say, “Will you dispute with us about Allah, when He is our Lord and your Lord, and we have our deeds, and you have yours, and we are sincere to Him?”
002|140|Do you assert that Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, and the Tribes were Jews or Christians? Say, “Are you more knowledgeable, or is Allah?” Who is more unjust than one who conceals a testimony he has from Allah? Allah is not unaware of what you do.
002|141|That was a community that has passed on. They are responsible for their actions, and you are responsible for yours. You won’t be questioned about what they did.
002|142|The foolish among the people will say, “Why did they change their prayer direction?” Say: “To Allah belong the East and the West, He guides whom He wills to a straight path.”
002|143|We made you a balanced community, so that you may be witnesses over humanity, and the Messenger may be a witness over you. We established your former prayer direction to differentiate those who follow the Messenger from those who turn back on their heels. It was indeed significant, except for those whom Allah has guided. Allah won’t let your faith be wasted. Indeed, Allah is, to the people, Kind and Merciful.
002|144|We observed you turning your face towards the heavens, so We will guide you to a direction that will please you. Turn your face towards the Sacred Mosque, and wherever you may be, face it. Those given the Scripture know this to be the truth from their Lord. Allah is not unaware of what they do.
002|145|Even if you were to bring to those who were given the Scripture every verse, they wouldn’t follow your direction, nor should you follow theirs. Nor do they follow one another’s direction. If you followed their desires, after the knowledge that has come to you, you would then be among the unjust.
002|146|Those to whom We gave the Scripture recognize it as they recognize their own children. But some of them knowingly conceal the truth.
002|147|The truth is from your Lord, so don’t be among the doubters.
002|148|For each, there is a direction they turn to, so compete in doing good deeds. Wherever you may be, Allah will bring you all together. Allah has power over all things.
002|149|And from wherever you go out, turn your face towards the Sacred Mosque. This is the truth from your Lord. Allah is not unaware of what you do.
002|150|From wherever you set out, turn your face towards the Sacred Mosque. And wherever you are, face it, so that people will have no argument against you, except for the wrongdoers among them. So don’t fear them, but fear Me. I will then complete My favor upon you, so that you may be guided.
002|151|Even as We sent to you a messenger from among you, who conveys Our verses to you, purifies you, teaches you the Scripture and wisdom, and teaches you what you didn’t know.
002|152|So remember Me, and I will remember you. Be thankful to Me, and don’t reject faith.
002|153|O you who believe, seek help through patience and prayer; indeed Allah is with those who are patient.
002|154|Don’t say of those who are killed in Allah’s way, “They are dead.” Rather, they are alive, but you can’t perceive it.
002|155|We will certainly test you with a measure of fear, hunger, loss of wealth, lives, and fruits. But give good news to the patient.
002|156|Those who, when a disaster strikes them, say, “To Allah we belong, and to Him we will return.”
002|157|Upon them are blessings and mercy from their Lord, and these are the guided ones.
002|158|Safa and Marwa are among the symbols of Allah. Anyone who performs Hajj to the House or Umrah is not guilty if they circulate between them. Whoever volunteers goodness—Allah is Appreciative and All-Knowing.
002|159|Those who suppress the clear signs and guidance that We revealed, after We made them clear for people in the Scripture—on them is Allah’s curse and the curse of those who curse.
002|160|Except for those who repent, reform, and declare. These—I will accept their repentance. I am the Acceptor of Repentance, the Most Merciful.
002|161|Those who disbelieve and die while they are unbelievers are cursed by Allah, the angels, and all people.
002|162|They will remain under it forever, without relief or reprieve from the punishment.
002|163|Your God is One God. There is no god but He, the Cracious, the Merciful.
002|164|In the creation of the heavens and the earth, the alternation of night and day, the ships that traverse the seas for humanity’s benefit, the rain that Allah sends down from the skies to revive the earth after its death, the dispersal of all kinds of creatures, the shifting of the winds, and the clouds suspended between the sky and the earth, are signs for people who contemplate.
002|165|Some among the people equate others with Allah, loving them as the love of Allah. But those who believe have a greater love for Allah. If only the wrongdoers could witness the punishment, they would realize that all power belongs to Allah and that Allah is severe in penalty.
002|166|When they face the punishment, those who were followed will disown their followers, and all their ties will be severed.
002|167|Those who followed will say, “If only we could return, we would disown them as they’ve disowned us.” Thus, Allah will show them their actions as a cause for regret, and they won’t escape the Fire.
002|168|O people, consume what’s lawful and wholesome on earth, and don’t follow Satan’s footsteps, for he is your declared enemy.
002|169|He commands you to evil and indecency, and to say about Allah what you don’t know.
002|170|When it is said to them, “Follow what Allah revealed,” they respond, “We will follow what we found our ancestors following.” Even though their ancestors had no understanding or guidance?
002|171|The likeness of those who disbelieve is that of someone who listens to shouting, without comprehension—deaf, dumb, and blind, they don’t understand.
002|172|O you who believe, eat of the wholesome things We’ve provided you, and give thanks to Allah, if it’s Him you worship.
002|173|He forbade you carrion, blood, pork, and food consecrated to anyone other than Allah. However, if anyone is compelled by necessity—without desire or transgression—there is no sin upon him. Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
002|174|Those who conceal what Allah revealed in the Scripture and exchange it for a trivial gain, those swallow into their bellies nothing but fire. On the Day of Resurrection, Allah will neither speak to them nor purify them; for them is a painful punishment.
002|175|These are the ones who have purchased error at the price of guidance and punishment at the price of forgiveness. How will they withstand the Fire?
002|176|This is because Allah revealed the Scripture in truth. Those who dispute the Scripture are in extreme dissent.
002|177|Righteousness is not about turning your faces East or West. Righteousness is believing in Allah, the Last Day, the angels, the Scripture, and the Prophets; sharing wealth—despite love for it—with relatives, orphans, the needy, the homeless, those who ask; and freeing enslaved people; performing prayers, giving purifying charity, fulfilling promises when made, and enduring through illness, hardship, and times of strife. These are the truthful, and these are the righteous.
002|178|O you who believe, retribution is prescribed for you in cases of murder: the free for the free, the enslaved for the enslaved, and the female for the female. However, if one is pardoned by his counterpart, grant any reasonable demand and compensate him amicably. This is a leniency and a mercy from your Lord. Whoever transgresses after that will have a severe punishment.
002|179|The principle of retribution serves to preserve life for you, O people of understanding, so you may exercise self-restraint.
002|180|When death approaches any of you, if he leaves behind wealth, the will is a duty upon him, for parents and close relatives, in a fair manner—an obligation upon the righteous.
002|181|If anyone alters it after hearing it, the sin is on those who change it. Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.
002|182|If one fears wrongdoing or bias from a testator and mediates peace among them, he does not sin. Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
002|183|O you who believe, fasting has been decreed for you, as it was for those before you, so that you may attain righteousness.
002|184|For a set number of days. However, if any of you is ill or on a journey, then on other days. And upon those who are able—a ransom of feeding a poor person. If you voluntarily do good, it’s better for you. And if you fast, it is better for you, if only you knew.
002|185|Ramadan is the month in which the Quran was revealed, as guidance for humanity, with clear signs of guidance, and the criterion. Whoever among you witnesses the month should fast it. But if anyone is ill or on a journey, then a number of other days. Allah intends ease for you, not difficulty. So complete the prescribed period, glorify Allah for guiding you, and express gratitude.
002|186|When My servants ask you about Me, I am near, and I respond to the call of the caller when he calls upon Me. So, let them respond to Me and believe in Me, so that they may be guided.
002|187|During the nights of fasting, it is permissible for you to be intimate with your wives. They are a garment for you, and you are a garment for them. Allah knew that you used to deceive yourselves, so He relented towards you and forgave you. Now, approach them and seek what Allah ordained for you. Eat and drink until the white thread of dawn becomes distinguishable from the black thread. Then, complete the fast until nightfall. But don’t approach them while you’re in seclusion at the mosques. These are the limits of Allah, so don’t approach them. Thus Allah makes clear His ordinances to people, so they may become righteous.
002|188|Don’t consume each other’s wealth unjustly, nor offer it to the judges in order to wrongfully and knowingly consume a portion of the wealth of others.
002|189|They ask you about the new moons. Say, “They are time markers for people and for the Hajj.” Virtue is not in entering homes from their backs, but virtue is in righteousness. So, enter homes through their doors, and be mindful of Allah, so you may succeed.
002|190|Fight in the path of Allah those who fight you, but don’t commit aggression. Allah doesn’t love the aggressors.
002|191|Kill them wherever you overtake them, and expel them from where they expelled you. Persecution is more severe than killing. Don’t fight them at the Sacred Mosque, unless they fight you there. If they fight you, then kill them—such is the penalty for the unbelievers.
002|192|But if they cease, then Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
002|193|Fight them until there is no more persecution, and religion is solely for Allah. But if they cease, then there should be no aggression, except against the oppressors.
002|194|The sacred month for the sacred month; any violation of sanctity invites retaliation. Whoever initiates aggression against you, respond in kind. Be mindful of Allah, and know that Allah is with the righteous.
002|195|Spend in the way of Allah, but don’t throw yourselves into ruin. And do good; indeed, Allah loves the doers of good.
002|196|Perform the Hajj and Umrah for Allah. If you are prevented, then make a feasible offering. Don’t shave your heads until the offering reaches its destination. Whoever among you is ill or has an ailment of the head must offer a ransom of fasting or charity or devotion. During times of peace, those who combine the Umrah and Hajj must make an offering they can afford. If unable, then fasting for three days during Hajj and seven upon your return, totaling ten. This applies to those whose families don’t reside near the Sacred Mosque. Be conscious of Allah, and know that Allah is stern in retribution.
002|197|The Hajj is during the specified months. Anyone who commits to performing the Hajj must refrain from intimate relations, sinful behavior, and arguments during the Hajj. Whatever good you do, Allah knows it. Provision yourselves, but the best provision is piety. So fear Me, O people of understanding.
002|198|You incur no sin by seeking the grace of your Lord. When you descend from Arafat, remember Allah at the Sacred Monument, and remember Him for having guided you, for before this you were astray.
002|199|Then disperse from where the people disperse, and ask for Allah’s forgiveness. Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
002|200|When you have completed your rites, remember Allah as you remember your parents, or even more so. Some people say, “Our Lord, give us in this world,” but they will have no share in the Hereafter.
002|201|Others say, “Our Lord, give us good in this world and good in the Hereafter, and protect us from the suffering of the Fire.”
002|202|These will have a share of what they’ve earned. Allah is swift in accounting.
002|203|Remember Allah during the appointed days. If someone is in a hurry to return in two days, there is no sin on him; if someone stays on, there is no sin on him either—provided they maintain righteousness. Be conscious of Allah, and know you will be gathered to Him.
002|204|There is a type of person whose speech in this worldly life may impress you, and he calls Allah to witness what’s in his heart, yet he is the fiercest of opponents.
002|205|Once he gains power, he aims to wreak havoc on earth and ruin its crops and lineage. Allah doesn’t like corruption.
002|206|When told, “Fear Allah,” pride leads him to further sin. Hell will suffice him—and what a wretched destination.
002|207|And there are those who sell themselves seeking approval of Allah; Allah is Kind to the servants.
002|208|O you who have believed, enter into submission completely, and don’t follow Satan’s footsteps; he is a clear enemy to you.
002|209|If you relapse after the clear signs have come to you, then know that Allah is Powerful and Wise.
002|210|Are they awaiting the arrival of Allah Himself amidst the clouds, escorted by the angels? The matter would have already been resolved by then. All matters ultimately return to Allah.
002|211|Ask the Children of Israel how many clear signs We’ve given them. Anyone who substitutes a blessing he has from Allah—Allah is stern in retribution.
002|212|The worldly life is made alluring to those who disbelieve, and they ridicule those who believe. but the righteous will be above them on Resurrection Day. Allah provides for whom He wills, without measure.
002|213|Mankind was a single community, then Allah sent Messengers with good news and warnings. Alongside them, He revealed the Scripture with the truth, to judge between people in their disputes. It was only after receiving clear proofs that they began to differ, due to mutual envy. By His will, Allah guided the believers to the truth about which they had disputed. Allah guides whom He wills onto a straight path.
002|214|Or do you think you will enter Paradise, without undergoing the trials faced by those before you? They were afflicted with hardship and adversity, and were so shaken up, that the Messenger and those who believed with him said, “When will Allah’s help come?” Surely, Allah’s help is near.
002|215|They ask you about what they should spend. Respond, “Whatever you spend should be for parents, relatives, orphans, the poor, and the person on the path. Whatever good you do, Allah is fully aware of it.”
002|216|Fighting has been ordained for you, even though you dislike it. It is possible that you dislike something which is good for you, and that you like something which is bad for you. Allah knows, and you don’t.
002|217|They ask you about fighting during the Sacred Month. Say, “Fighting during it is a great sin. But to divert from the path of Allah, and disbelieve in Him, and prevent access to the Sacred Mosque, and expel its inhabitants, is more serious with Allah. And strife is worse than killing.” They won’t cease fighting you until they make you renounce your faith, if they can. Whoever among you turns back from his religion and dies as a disbeliever, their deeds will come to nothing in this world and the Hereafter. These are the dwellers of the Fire, where they will remain forever.
002|218|However, those who have faith, emigrate and strive in Allah’s path can hope for Allah’s mercy. Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
002|219|They ask you about wine and gambling. Say, “In both is great sin as well as some benefits for people. But their sin outweighs their benefits.” They ask you what they should spend. Say, “The excess.” Thus, Allah makes His verses clear to you, so that you may reflect.
002|220|Concerning this world and the Hereafter. They ask you about orphans. Say, “Acting in their best interests is good. But if you mix with them, consider them your brothers.” Allah knows the corruptor from the reformer. Had Allah willed, He could’ve imposed hardship on you. Allah is Mighty and Wise.
002|221|Don’t marry polytheistic women until they believe. A believing maid is better than a polytheist, even if she appeals to you. Likewise, don’t marry polytheistic men until they believe. A believing servant is better than a polytheist, even if he appeals to you. These invite to the Fire, while Allah invites to Paradise and to forgiveness, by His leave. He makes His verses clear for people, so they may reflect.
002|222|They ask you about menstruation. Respond, “It is harmful; so keep away from women during menstruation, and don’t approach them until they are pure. Once they are pure, approach them as Allah has directed you.” Allah loves those who repent and those who purify themselves.
002|223|Your wives are your culture, so approach your culture as you desire. Prepare for yourselves, fear Allah, and know you will encounter Him. Give good news to the believers.
002|224|And don’t make Allah, because of your oaths, an obstruction preventing you from doing good and acting rightly and making peace among people. Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.
002|225|Allah won’t hold you accountable for unintentional oaths, but He will hold you responsible for what your hearts intend. Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
002|226|Those who vow to abstain from their wives have a waiting period of four months. If they reconcile, then indeed, Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
002|227|If they are resolved for divorce—Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.
002|228|Divorced women should wait by themselves for three cycles. It’s not permissible for them to hide what Allah has created in their wombs—if they believe in Allah and the Last Day. Their husbands have more right to take them back, if they desire reconciliation. Women have rights similar to their obligations, according to what’s fair, but men have a degree over them. Allah is Mighty and Wise.
002|229|Divorce is twice. Either retain them with kindness or release them in a good manner. It’s not lawful for you to take back what you’ve given them, unless both fear they can’t uphold Allah’s limits. If you fear they can’t uphold Allah’s limits, they are not blamed for reaching a mutual agreement. These are Allah’s boundaries, so don’t overstep them. Those who overstep Allah’s boundaries are the wrongdoers.
002|230|If he divorces her, she’s not lawful for him until she marries a husband other than him. If he divorces her, there is no fault in them for returning, if they think they can maintain the boundaries set by Allah. These are Allah’s limits, which He makes clear for those who know.
002|231|When you divorce women, and they reach their term, either retain them with kindness or part with them with dignity. Don’t retain them to cause harm or to transgress. Whoever does so wrongs his soul. Don’t make a mockery of Allah’s revelations, and remember Allah’s favor upon you, and the Scripture and wisdom He revealed to instruct you. Be conscious of Allah, and know that Allah is aware of everything.
002|232|When you divorce women, and they fulfill their terms, don’t prevent them from remarrying if they agree on reasonable terms. This advice is for those who believe in Allah and the Last Day. This is purer and more honorable for you. Allah knows, while you don’t.
002|233|Mothers should nurse their children for two complete years if they wish to complete the nursing period. The father must provide sustenance and clothing for them in a reasonable manner. No soul should be burdened beyond its capacity. Neither mother nor father should suffer due to their child. The same duty rests upon the heir. If both parents decide to wean by mutual consent and consultation, there is no blame upon them. You are not at fault for hiring wet nurses, provided you pay them fairly. Fear Allah, and know that Allah sees all that you do.
002|234|Those of you who pass away and leave wives, they should wait alone for four months and ten days. Once they have completed their term, you bear no responsibility for their reasonable decisions. Allah is fully aware of what you do.
002|235|You commit no error by announcing your engagement to the women, or keeping it secret. Allah knows that you will eventually propose to them. However, don’t meet them secretly unless you have a legitimate matter to discuss. Don’t finalize the marriage until the writing is fulfilled. Be aware that Allah knows what’s in your hearts, so be cautious of Him, and know that Allah is Most Forgiving, Most Forbearing.
002|236|There is no blame on you for divorcing women before you have touched them or specified a dowry for them. Nevertheless, give them a provision—the wealthy according to his means and the poor according to his—this is a duty upon the virtuous.
002|237|If you divorce them before touching them, but after specifying a dowry for them, then give them half of what you specified, unless they waive it or the one who holds the marriage contract waives it. To waive is closer to righteousness. Don’t forget to treat each other with kindness. Allah sees all that you do.
002|238|Guard your prayers, and the middle prayer, and stand before Allah in devotion.
002|239|If you’re in fear, then on foot or riding. But when you’re secure, remember Allah, as He taught you what you didn’t previously know.
002|240|Those of you who die and leave behind wives should leave a will providing one year’s maintenance without forcing them to leave. However, if they choose to leave, there is no blame on you for what they decide for themselves. Allah is All-Powerful, All-Wise.
002|241|Divorced women should receive sustenance according to what’s fair—an obligation on the righteous.
002|242|Thus does Allah clarify His verses for you, so you may use your reason.
002|243|Didn’t you consider those who fled their homes in the thousands, fearing death? Allah said to them, “Die,” and then He revived them. Allah is full of grace towards people, but most people are not appreciative.
002|244|Fight in the cause of Allah, and know that Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.
002|245|Who will offer Allah a loan of righteousness, which He will multiply for him manifold? Allah constricts and expands, and to Him, you will be returned.
002|246|Didn’t you consider the leaders of the Children of Israel after Moses? When they said to a prophet of theirs, “Appoint for us a king, and we will fight in Allah’s path.” He questioned, “Would you perhaps refrain from fighting if it were prescribed for you?” They replied, “Why wouldn’t we fight in Allah’s path, when we were expelled from our homes and separated from our children?” However, when fighting was prescribed for them, they turned away, all except a few of them. And Allah is fully aware of the unjust.
002|247|Their prophet told them, “Allah appointed Saul as a king.” They objected, “How can he have authority over us, when we’re more deserving of authority than he, and he wasn’t given ample wealth?” He replied, “Allah chose him over you and increased him abundantly in knowledge and physique.” And Allah gives His kingship to whom He wills. And Allah is Boundless, All-Knowing.”
002|248|Their prophet further told them, “The sign of his kingship is the restoration of the Ark to you, containing reassurance from your Lord, and legacy of the family of Moses and the family of Aaron, carried by the angels. In this lies a sign for you, if you are believers.”
002|249|When Saul set out with the troops, he said, “Allah will test you with a river. Whoever drinks from it isn’t of me, and whoever doesn’t drink from it is of me, except for one who sips a handful with his hand.” Yet, they drank from it, except a few of them. When he and the faithful with him crossed it, they said, “We have no power today against Goliath and his warriors.” However, those sure that they would meet Allah said, “How often did a small group overcome a large group with Allah’s permission? Allah is with the patient.”
002|250|And when they confronted Goliath and his warriors, they prayed, “Our Lord, fill us with patience, strengthen our foothold, and help us against the disbelieving people.”
002|251|With Allah’s permission, they defeated them. David killed Goliath, Allah gave him kingship and wisdom, and He taught him what He willed. If Allah didn’t repel some people through others, the earth would be corrupted. Allah is gracious to all the world.
002|252|These are Allah’s verses, which We convey to you in truth. Surely, you are one of the messengers.
002|253|Among the messengers, We favored some over others. To some, Allah spoke directly, while others, He raised high in degrees. We gave Jesus, the son of Mary, clear miracles, and We supported him with the Holy Spirit. Had Allah willed, those after them wouldn’t have fought each other, after the clear signs had come to them. Yet they differed; some of them believed, while others disbelieved. Had Allah willed, they wouldn’t have fought, but Allah does what He wills.
002|254|O you who believe, spend from what We provided for you before a Day arrives when there is no trading, friendship, or intercession. The unbelievers are the unjust.
002|255|Allah—there is no god except Him, the Ever-Living, the Sustainer of all existence. Neither drowsiness overtakes Him, nor sleep. To Him belongs everything in the heavens and the earth. Who can intercede with Him, except with His permission? He knows what lies before and behind them. They can only grasp a portion of His knowledge that He permits. His throne extends over the heavens and the earth, and their preservation tires Him not. He is the Most High, the Supreme.
002|256|There is no coercion in matters of faith; the right way has become distinct from the erroneous one. Whoever rejects evil and believes in Allah has grasped the firmest handhold, which never breaks. Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.
002|257|Allah is the ally of those who believe, He guides them from darkness into light. However, those who disbelieve have the oppressors as their allies, they lead them from light into darkness. These are the inhabitants of the Fire, where they will remain eternally.
002|258|Haven’t you considered him who argued with Abraham about his Lord, simply because Allah had given him authority. Abraham said, “My Lord gives life and causes death.” He replied, “I give life and cause death.” Abraham countered, “Allah brings the sun from the east; now bring it from the west.” The disbeliever was confounded. Allah does not guide the wrongdoing people.
002|259|Consider the man who came upon a ruined village and wondered, “How can Allah revive this after its death?” Then Allah caused him to die for a century and then resurrected him. He asked, “How long did you remain?” He replied, “I remained for a day or part of a day.” He said, “No, you remained for a hundred years. Look at your food and drink; they haven’t spoiled. And look at your donkey. We will make you a sign for people. Look at the bones, how We reconstruct them and then clothe them with flesh.” When it was made clear to him, he said, “I know that Allah is capable of everything.”
002|260|When Abraham asked, “My Lord, show me how You bring the dead to life,” He replied, “Didn’t you believe?” He responded, “Yes, but just to reassure my heart.” He instructed, “Take four birds, train them to come to you, then place a portion of them on each hill, then call them—they will come to you swiftly. And know that Allah is Mighty and Wise.”
002|261|The likeness of those who spend their wealth in Allah’s path is like a seed that sprouts seven spikes, in each spike is a hundred grains. Allah multiplies to whom He wills. Allah is All-Encompassing, All-Knowing.
002|262|Those who spend their wealth in Allah’s way, and don’t follow their gifts with reminders or with harm, will have their reward with their Lord. They shall not fear, nor shall they grieve.
002|263|Kind words and forgiveness are better than charity followed by harm. Allah is Rich, Forbearing.
002|264|O you who believe, don’t invalidate your charitable deeds with reminders or harm, like the one who spends his wealth to be seen by people, and doesn’t believe in Allah or the Last Day. His example is like a hard, barren rock covered with dust; a downpour strikes it and leaves it bare. They gain nothing from their efforts. Allah does not guide the disbelieving people.
002|265|Those who spend their wealth seeking Allah’s approval, and out of self-affirmation, are like a garden on a height. When heavy rain falls on it, it doubles its yield. If no heavy rain falls, a drizzle suffices. Allah sees all that you do.
002|266|Would any of you wish to have a garden of date palms and vines, with rivers flowing through it, and all kinds of fruits for him therein, while he is stricken with old age, and has weak children, and a whirlwind carrying fire strikes it, and it burns? Thus, Allah clarifies His lessons to you—so you may reflect.
002|267|O you who believe, spend from the good things you’ve earned, and from what We’ve produced for you from the earth. Don’t aim to give the worst of it, the things you yourselves would only accept with closed eyes. And know that Allah is Self-Sufficient and Praiseworthy.
002|268|Satan threatens you with poverty and orders you to commit indecent acts, while Allah promises you forgiveness from Him and bounty. Allah is All-Encompassing, All-Knowing.
002|269|He grants wisdom to whom He wills, and whoever has been given wisdom has been given much good. Yet none will remember except those of understanding.
002|270|Whatever charity you give or vow you make, Allah knows it well. The wrongdoers will have no helpers.
002|271|It is good if you disclose your charitable expenditures, but if you conceal them and give them to the poor, it’s better for you and will erase some of your misdeeds. Allah is fully aware of what you do.
002|272|Their guidance isn’t your responsibility, but Allah guides whom He wills. What you spend of good is for yourselves. All acts of charity should be done seeking Allah’s favor. Whatever good you give will be returned to you in full, and you won’t be wronged.
002|273|For the poor who are restrained in Allah’s path, unable to work in the land. The ignorant person thinks, because of their modesty, that they are free from want. You can identify them by their marks. They don’t ask people persistently. Whatever good you give, Allah is fully aware of it.
002|274|Those who spend their wealth, night and day, secretly and publicly, will have their reward with their Lord. They will neither fear nor grieve.
002|275|Those who consume usury won’t rise, except as one whom Satan has driven to madness by his touch. This is because they say, “Commerce is just like usury.” However, Allah permitted commerce and prohibited usury. Whoever abstains after receiving a warning from his Lord, may keep his past earnings, and his case rests with Allah. However, those who persist are the residents of the Fire, where they will remain forever.
002|276|Allah wipes out usury and nurtures charitable deeds. Allah doesn’t love every ungrateful sinner.
002|277|Those who believe, perform good deeds, establish prayer, and give charity, their reward is with their Lord. They will neither fear nor grieve.
002|278|O you who believe, fear Allah and give up what remains of usury, if you are believers.
002|279|If you don’t, then take notice of a war from Allah and His Messenger. But if you repent, you may keep your principal. You won’t be wronged, and you won’t wrong.
002|280|If he is in difficulty, then grant a postponement until a time of ease. But if you waive it as charity, it would be better for you—if only you knew.
002|281|Beware of the Day when you will be returned to Allah, then every soul will be compensated what it has earned, and they won’t be treated unjustly.
002|282|O you who believe, when you contract a debt for a fixed term, put it in writing. Let a scribe write it down justly. No scribe should refuse to write as Allah has taught him. He should write, and it should be dictated, fearing Allah, his Lord, and not diminish anything from it. If the debtor is intellectually incapable, weak, or unable to dictate, then his guardian should dictate with fairness. Call upon two witnesses from among your men, and if two men are not available, then a man and two women acceptable to you as witnesses, so that if one of them errs, the other can remind her. Witnesses shouldn’t refuse when called upon. Don’t deem it insignificant to write it down, whether small or large, along with its due date. This is more just in the sight of Allah, provides stronger evidence, and is more likely to prevent doubts, unless it’s an immediate transaction conducted between you, in which case, there is no blame on you for not recording it. However, do ensure witnesses are present whenever you perform a trading transaction. Neither scribe nor witness should be harmed. If you do so, it would be a transgression on your part. So fear Allah, for it is Allah who educates you. Allah has full knowledge of everything.
002|283|If you are traveling and can’t find a scribe, a security deposit should be received. If you trust one another, let the one entrusted fulfill his trust, and let him fear Allah, his Lord. Don’t conceal the testimony, for whoever conceals it, his heart is sinful. Allah is fully aware of what you do.
002|284|Everything that exists in the heavens and the earth belongs to Allah. Whether you disclose what’s within yourselves, or conceal it, Allah will call you to account for it. He forgives whom He wills and punishes whom He wills. Allah is capable of all things.
002|285|The Messenger has believed in what was revealed to him from his Lord, and so have the believers. All of them believe in Allah, His angels, His scriptures, and His messengers: “We make no distinction between any of His messengers.” And they say, “We listen, and we obey. Your forgiveness, our Lord, and to You is the final destination.”
002|286|Allah does not burden any soul beyond its capacity. It will reap the benefits of what it earns, and bear the consequences of its misdeeds. “Our Lord, don’t hold us accountable if we forget or make mistakes. Our Lord, don’t burden us as You’ve burdened those before us. Our Lord, don’t burden us with more than we have strength for. Pardon us, forgive us, and have mercy on us. You are our Master, so help us over the disbelieving people.”
003|001|Alif. Lam. Meem.
003|002|Allah—there is no god but He, the Ever-Living, the Sustainer of all existence.
003|003|He revealed to you the Book with truth, confirming what preceded it. He also revealed the Torah and the Gospel.
003|004|Aforetime, as guidance for humanity. And He revealed the Criterion. Those who deny Allah’s revelations will face harsh punishment. Allah is Mighty, the Avenger.
003|005|Nothing on earth or in the heavens is hidden from Allah.
003|006|It is He who shapes you in the wombs as He wills. There is no deity but He, the Almighty, the Wise.
003|007|It is He who revealed to you the Scripture. Some of its verses are definitive—they are the foundation of the Book—while others are allegorical. Those with deviant hearts pursue the allegorical, seeking discord and seeking its interpretation. However, none knows its interpretation except Allah and those firmly grounded in knowledge say, “We believe in it; all of it is from our Lord.” Only those endowed with understanding take heed.
003|008|“Our Lord, don’t let our hearts deviate after You have guided us. Grant us mercy from Yourself; You are the Giver.”
003|009|“Our Lord, You will gather humankind on a Day that’s inevitable.” Allah never breaks His promise.
003|010|As for those who disbelieve, neither their wealth nor their children will avail them against Allah. These are Fuel for the Fire.
003|011|Similar to the command of Pharaoh’s people and those before them; they denied Our revelations, so Allah seized them for their sins. Allah is severe in retribution.
003|012|Tell those who disbelieve, “You will be overcome and gathered into Hell, a wretched destination.”
003|013|There was a lesson for you in the two groups that met—one fighting for Allah’s cause and the other of unbelievers. They saw them with their own eyes, twice their number. Allah supports with His aid whom He wills. In this, there is a lesson for those with insight.
003|014|Beautified for people is the love of desires—women, children, heaps of gold and silver, fine horses, livestock, and fertile lands. These are the pleasures of worldly life, but with Allah is the best return.
003|015|Say, “Shall I inform you of something better than these? For the righteous, there are Gardens with their Lord, beneath which rivers flow, where they will reside forever, with purified spouses and Allah’s approval.” Allah is Seeing of the beings.
003|016|Those who say, “Our Lord, we have believed, so forgive us our sins, and protect us from the suffering of the Fire.”
003|017|The patient, the truthful, the obedient, those who spend, and those who seek forgiveness at dawn.
003|018|Allah bears witness that there is no god except Him, and so do the angels and those endowed with knowledge. He upholds justice. There is no deity but He, the Mighty, the Wise.
003|019|Religion with Allah is Submission. Those given the Scripture only disputed after knowledge had come to them, out of jealousy. Whoever denies the signs of Allah—Allah is swift in reckoning.
003|020|If they argue with you, say, “I have submitted myself to Allah, and so have those who follow me.” To those who were given the Scripture and the unlettered, ask, “Have you submitted?” If they submit, they are guided, but if they turn away, your duty is only to convey the message. Allah is Observant of the beings.
003|021|Give news to those who deny Allah’s revelations, kill the Prophets without right, and kill those who advocate for justice, of a severe punishment.
003|022|Their deeds will be rendered worthless in this world and the Hereafter, and they will have no helpers.
003|023|Did you consider those who were given a portion of the Scripture? They were invited to the Book of Allah to judge between them, yet a group of them turned away in defiance.
003|024|This is because they say, “The Fire will touch us only for a number of days.” What they used to invent deceived them in their religion.
003|025|How will it be when We gather them on an inevitable Day? Every soul will be fully recompensed for what it has earned, and they won’t be treated unjustly.
003|026|Say, “O Allah, Holder of all sovereigns, You grant sovereignty to whom You will, and You strip sovereignty from whom You will. You honor whom You will, and You humiliate whom You will. In Your hand is the good; You are capable of everything.”
003|027|“You merge the night with the day, and the day with the night. You bring the living from the dead, and the dead from the living. And You supply whoever You will, without account.”
003|028|Believers should not take unbelievers as protectors instead of believers. Whoever does so has nothing to do with Allah, unless it is to protect oneself from them out of caution. Allah warns you about Himself. To Allah is the final return.
003|029|Say, “Whether you conceal what’s in your hearts or disclose it, Allah knows it.” He knows everything in the heavens and on earth. Allah is fully capable of all things.
003|030|On the Day when every soul will find its good deeds presented, it will wish there was a great distance between itself and its wrongdoings. Allah cautions you about Himself, and Allah is full of kindness to the servants.
003|031|Say, “If you love Allah, then follow me, and Allah will love you and forgive your sins.” Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
003|032|Say, “Obey Allah and the Messenger.” But if they turn away—Allah doesn’t love the disbelievers.
003|033|Allah chose Adam, Noah, the family of Abraham, and Imran’s family over all worlds.
003|034|They are offspring of one another. Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.
003|035|When Imran’s wife said, “O my Lord, I dedicate what’s in my womb to Your service, so accept it from me. You are the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing.”
003|036|When she delivered her, she said, “My Lord, I have delivered a female.” And Allah knew what she had delivered, “And the male isn’t like the female. I have named her Mary, and I seek Your protection for her and her offspring from Satan, the outcast.”
003|037|Her Lord graciously accepted her, made her grow in a beautiful manner, and entrusted her care to Zechariah. Whenever Zechariah visited her in the prayer chamber, he found her with provisions. He inquired, “Mary, from where did you get these?” She replied, “It is from Allah. Allah provides for whom He wills without measure.”
003|038|At that moment, Zechariah prayed to his Lord: “My Lord, grant me, through Your mercy, a good offspring—You are the Hearer of Prayers.”
003|039|As he stood in prayer in the prayer chamber, the angels called out to him: “Allah gives you good news of John, confirming a Word from Allah, a man of honor, virtue, and a righteous prophet.”
003|040|He asked, “My Lord, how can I have a child when I have reached old age and my wife is barren?” He said, “Thus Allah does whatever He wills.”
003|041|He then said, “My Lord, give me a sign.” He replied, “Your sign is that you shall not speak to anyone for three days except by signals. And remember your Lord often, and offer praises in the evening and the morning.”
003|042|The angels announced, “O Mary, Allah has chosen you, purified you, and selected you above the women of the world.”
003|043|“O Mary, devote yourself to your Lord, prostrate, and bow with those who bow down.”
003|044|This is news from the unseen, which We reveal to you. You weren’t with them when they cast their lots to determine who would be Mary’s guardian, nor were you with them when they disputed.
003|045|The angels announced, “O Mary, Allah gives you good news of a Word from Him. His name is Messiah, Jesus, son of Mary. He will be honored in the world, the Hereafter, and one of the nearest.
003|046|He will speak to people in infancy and maturity, and will be righteous.”
003|047|She asked, “My Lord, how can I have a child, when no man has touched me?” He replied, “It will be so; Allah creates whatever He wills. When He decrees a thing, He only says to it, ‘Be,’ and it is.”
003|048|He will teach him the Scripture, wisdom, the Torah and the Gospel.
003|049|As a messenger to the Children of Israel: “I bring you signs from your Lord. I create for you from clay the form of a bird, then I breathe into it, and by Allah’s permission, it becomes a bird. I heal the blind and the lepers, by Allah’s permission, and I revive the dead, by Allah’s permission. I inform you of what you eat and store in your homes. There is a sign for you in this, if you are believers.”
003|050|“And I confirm the Torah that preceded me, and I make some of what was forbidden to you lawful. I bring clear evidence from your Lord, so fear Allah and obey me.”
003|051|“Allah is my Lord and your Lord, so worship Him. This is a straight path.”
003|052|When Jesus sensed their disbelief, he asked, “Who will be my allies in Allah’s cause?” The disciples responded, “We are Allah’s allies. We have faith in Allah, and you can witness that we are submitters.”
003|053|“Our Lord, we believe in what You’ve revealed, and we follow the Messenger, so record us among the witnesses.”
003|054|They planned, and Allah planned. And Allah is the best of planners.
003|055|Allah said, “O Jesus, I am concluding your life, elevating you to Myself, and purifying you from those who disbelieve. I will position those who follow you above those who disbelieve, until Resurrection Day. Then, to Me is your return, and I will arbitrate among you regarding your disputes.
003|056|As for those who disbelieve, I will punish them severely in this world and the Hereafter, and they will have no helpers.
003|057|However, for those who believe and do righteous deeds, He will reward them fully. Allah doesn’t love the unjust.”
003|058|These are the verses that We convey to you, and the Wise Reminder.
003|059|In the sight of Allah, Jesus is like Adam: He created him from soil, then He said to him, “Be!” and he was.
003|060|This is the truth from your Lord, so don’t be among the doubters.
003|061|If anyone disputes with you about him, after the knowledge that has come to you, say, “Come, let us call our children and your children, our women and your women, ourselves and yourselves, then we can make a prayer and invoke the curse of Allah upon the liars.”
003|062|This is the factual narrative. There is no god but Allah. And certainly, Allah is the Mighty, the Wise.
003|063|If they turn away, then Allah is aware of the corrupters.
003|064|Say, “O People of the Scripture, let us come to a common word: that we worship none but Allah, that we associate nothing with Him, and that we don’t take each other as lords besides Allah.” If they turn away, say, “Bear witness that we are submissive.”
003|065|O People of the Scripture, why do you argue about Abraham, when the Torah and the Gospel weren’t revealed until after him? Don’t you reason?
003|066|Here you are, arguing about things you know of, but why do you argue about things you don’t know? Allah knows, and you don’t know.
003|067|Abraham was neither a Jew nor a Christian, but a monotheist, a submitter, and he wasn’t of the polytheists.
003|068|Those most deserving of Abraham are those who follow him, this Prophet and those who believe. Allah is the Ally of the believers.
003|069|Some People of the Scripture wish to mislead you, but they only mislead themselves without realizing it.
003|070|O People of the Scripture, why do you deny Allah’s verses, even while you witness them?
003|071|O People of the Scripture, why do you mix truth with falsehood and knowingly conceal the truth?
003|072|Some people of the Scripture say, “Believe in what was revealed to the believers at the beginning of the day, disbelieve at the end of the day, so they may return.”
003|073|Believe in no one except those who follow your religion. Say, “Allah’s guidance is the guidance. If anyone is given the same as you were, or argues with you before your Lord, say, ‘All blessings are in Allah’s hand; He grants them to whom He wills. Allah’s bounty is infinite, and He is All-Knowing.’”
003|074|He selects for His mercy whom He wills. And indeed, Allah is of great bounty.
003|075|Among the People of the Scripture, there are those who, if entrusted with a fortune, will return it to you. Yet, there are others who, if entrusted with a single coin, won’t return it unless you constantly stand over them. That is because they say, “We are under no obligation towards the Gentiles.” They knowingly tell lies about Allah.
003|076|But yes, whoever fulfills his pledge and acts righteously—Allah loves the righteous.
003|077|Those who exchange Allah’s covenant and their oaths for a trivial gain will have no share in the Hereafter, and Allah will neither speak to them nor look at them on Resurrection Day nor purify them. A severe punishment awaits them.
003|078|Some of them manipulate the Scripture with their tongues to make you think it’s from the Scripture when it’s not. And they say, “This is from Allah,” when it’s not from Allah. They tell a lie about Allah knowingly.
003|079|It is not possible for a human to whom Allah has given the Scripture, wisdom, and prophethood to tell people, “Worship me apart from Allah.” Instead, “Be worshipers of the Lord, according to the Scripture you teach and study.”
003|080|And he would not command you to take angels and prophets as lords. Would he command you to disbelief after you’ve submitted?
003|081|Allah received a covenant from the prophets: “Having given you the Scripture and wisdom, if there comes to you a messenger confirming what you have, you must believe in him and support him.” He asked, “Do you agree and accept My covenant on these terms?” They responded, “We agree.” He said, “Then bear witness, and I am also among the witnesses.”
003|082|Those who turn away after this are the transgressors.
003|083|Do they seek a religion other than that of Allah, when everything in the heavens and on earth has submitted to Him, willingly or unwillingly, and to Him, they will be returned?
003|084|Say, “We believe in Allah and in what was revealed to us, in what was revealed to Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, and the Tribes, and in what was given to Moses, Jesus, and the prophets from their Lord. We make no distinction between any of them, and to Him we are submissive.”
003|085|Whoever seeks a religion other than Submission, it will not be accepted from him, and in the Hereafter, he will be among the losers.
003|086|How can Allah guide those who disbelieved after their faith, and after they witnessed the truth of the Messenger and clear proofs came to them? Allah doesn’t guide the wrongdoing people.
003|087|Upon such individuals rests the curse of Allah, the angels, and humanity.
003|088|They will abide in it eternally; their torment won’t be alleviated, nor will they be granted any reprieve.
003|089|Except for those who repent thereafter and reform. Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
003|090|Those who disbelieve after their belief, then increase in their disbelief, their repentance won’t be accepted—these are the astray.
003|091|Those who reject faith and die as unbelievers, even if they were to offer a ransom equivalent to the earth’s weight in gold, it wouldn’t be accepted from them. These are destined for a painful punishment, and they will have no helpers.
003|092|You won’t attain virtue until you give from what you hold dear. Whatever you give, Allah is fully aware of it.
003|093|All food was lawful for the Children of Israel, except what Israel had prohibited for itself before the Torah was revealed. Say, “Bring the Torah and recite it—if you are truthful.”
003|094|Those who fabricate lies about Allah after this are the wrongdoers.
003|095|Say, “Allah speaks the truth. So, follow the religion of Abraham, the monotheist, who was not of those who associated.”
003|096|The first house established for humanity is the one at Bakkah—blessed and a guidance for all peoples.
003|097|Within it are clear signs, such as the standing place of Abraham. Whoever enters it attains tranquility. Pilgrimage to the House is a duty to Allah for those who can make the journey. But whoever refuses—Allah doesn’t need any being in the universe.
003|098|Say, “O People of the Scripture, why do you deny Allah’s verses while Allah is a Witness to your actions?”
003|099|Say, “O People of the Scripture, why do you deter believers from Allah’s path, attempting to make it seem crooked, even though you are witnesses? Allah is not unaware of what you do.”
003|100|O you who have believed, if you obey some of those who were given the Scripture, they would turn you back, after your faith, into unbelievers.
003|101|How can you disbelieve, when Allah’s revelations are being conveyed to you, and His Messenger is among you? Whoever holds fast to Allah will be guided to a straight path.
003|102|O you who believe, revere Allah with the reverence He is due, and don’t die except as Submitters.
003|103|Hold fast to the rope of Allah, all together, and don’t be divided. Remember Allah’s favor upon you, when you were enemies to each other, and He reconciled your hearts. By His grace, you became brethren. You were on the brink of a pit of Fire, and He saved you from falling into it. Thus, Allah makes His revelations clear to you, so you may be guided.
003|104|Let there emerge from among you a community calling for goodness, promoting righteousness, and deterring evil. These are the successful ones.
003|105|Don’t be like those who split and disagreed after receiving clear proofs. For them is a severe punishment.
003|106|On the Day when some faces will brighten, and others will darken. To those whose faces have darkened: “Did you disbelieve after having faith? So taste the punishment for your disbelief.”
003|107|Those with bright faces will be in Allah’s mercy, forever.
003|108|These are Allah’s revelations that We convey to you in truth. And Allah does not desire any injustice for the worlds.
003|109|Everything in the heavens and on earth belongs to Allah, and all affairs are returned to Him.
003|110|You are the best community ever raised among mankind, promoting what’s good, forbidding what’s evil, and you believe in Allah. If the People of the Scripture had believed, it would’ve been better for them. Among them are believers, but most of them are sinful.
003|111|They won’t harm you except for some annoyance. If they fight you, they will turn their backs and flee, finding no support.
003|112|They are marked by humiliation wherever they are found, except when they are under a covenant from Allah and a covenant from people. They drew upon themselves Allah’s wrath and are marked by misery. This is because they rejected Allah’s revelations, unjustly killed the prophets, and persistently defied and transgressed.
003|113|Not all of them are alike. Among the People of the Scripture, an upright community recites Allah’s verses during the night hours, and they prostrate themselves.
003|114|They believe in Allah and the Last Day, advocate for what’s right, forbid what’s wrong, and hasten to perform good deeds. These are among the righteous.
003|115|No good deed of theirs is ever rejected. Allah is fully aware of the virtuous.
003|116|As for the unbelievers, their wealth and children won’t avail against Allah. They are destined for the Fire, where they will remain forever.
003|117|What they spend in this life is similar to a wind that has frost and strikes the harvest of a people who wronged themselves and destroys it. Allah didn’t wrong them, but they wronged themselves.
003|118|O you who believe, don’t take as confidants those outside your ranks, as they will spare no effort to harm you. They desire your downfall. Their words show their hatred, but what their hearts conceal is far worse. We made the signs clear for you, if you would understand.
003|119|Here you are, loving them, yet they don’t love you, while you believe in the entirety of the Scripture. When they encounter you, they say, “We believe.” But when they’re alone, they bite their fingertips in rage against you. Say, “Die in your rage!” Allah is fully aware of what’s in the hearts.
003|120|If a good thing befalls you, it grieves them; but if a disaster strikes you, they rejoice. However, if you remain patient and righteous, their scheming won’t harm you at all. Allah encompasses all their actions.
003|121|And when you departed from your family in the morning to position the believers at their battle posts. And Allah is Hearing and Knowing.
003|122|Two groups among you were about to falter, but Allah was their supporter. In Allah, the believers should place their trust.
003|123|Allah had already granted you victory at Badr when you were outnumbered. So, remember Allah, so you may be grateful.
003|124|Remember when you were telling the believers, “Is it not enough that your Lord has reinforced you with three thousand angels sent down?”
003|125|Yes, if you remain patient and mindful, and they attack you suddenly, your Lord will reinforce you with five thousand angels, clearly marked.
003|126|Allah designed this as a message of reassurance to soothe your hearts. Victory comes solely from Allah, the Mighty, the Wise.
003|127|His intent was to cut off a section of the unbelievers or restrain them, so they retreat in frustration.
003|128|It’s not for you to decide whether He should forgive or punish them; they are wrongdoers.
003|129|To Allah belongs everything in the heavens and everything on the earth. He forgives whom He wills and punishes whom He wills. Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
003|130|O you who believe, don’t consume usury, which accumulates and multiplies. Fear Allah, so that you may prosper.
003|131|Protect yourselves from a Fire prepared for the unbelievers.
003|132|And obey Allah and the Messenger that you may obtain mercy.
003|133|Hurry to forgiveness from your Lord and a Paradise as vast as the heavens and the earth, prepared for the pious.
003|134|Those who spend during ease and hardship, restrain their anger, and pardon people—Allah loves the doers of good.
003|135|Those who, when they commit an immorality or wrong themselves, remember Allah and seek forgiveness for their sins. Who but Allah can forgive sins? And they don’t knowingly persist in their wrongdoing.
003|136|Their reward is forgiveness from their Lord, and gardens beneath which rivers flow, where they will abide forever. How excellent is the reward for the workers!
003|137|Numerous ways of life have passed before you. So, travel through the earth and observe how the end of the deniers was.
003|138|This is a clear explanation for humanity, and guidance and advice for the righteous.
003|139|Don’t lose heart or be sad; you are the superior ones—if you are believers.
003|140|If a wound has touched you, similar wounds have touched the others. Such days We give to people by turns, so that Allah may identify those who believe, and take witnesses from among you. Allah doesn’t love the wrongdoers.
003|141|And thus, Allah purifies the believers and destroys the unbelievers.
003|142|Did you think you would enter Paradise without Allah distinguishing those among you who strive for His cause and those who are steadfast?
003|143|You were desiring death before you met it. Now, you’ve seen it while looking.
003|144|Muhammad is only a messenger. Numerous messengers have preceded him. If he were to die or be killed, would you then turn back on your heels? Those who turn back won’t harm Allah in the least. Allah will reward the grateful.
003|145|No soul can die except by Allah’s leave, at a time ordained. Whoever wants the rewards of this world, We will give him thereof. And whoever wants the rewards of the Hereafter, We will give him thereof. We will reward the thankful.
003|146|How many a prophet fought alongside him, many godly men? They didn’t waver in the face of what afflicted them in Allah’s path, nor did they weaken or give in. Allah loves the steadfast.
003|147|Their only plea was, “Our Lord, forgive us our sins and our excesses in our affairs, strengthen our foothold, and give us victory over the disbelieving people.”
003|148|So, Allah granted them this world’s reward and the Hereafter’s excellent reward. And Allah loves the doers of good.
003|149|O you who believe, if you listen to the non-believers, they will turn you back on your heels, and you will become losers.
003|150|Allah is your Protector, and He is the best of helpers.
003|151|We will cast terror into the hearts of those who disbelieve, because they associate partners with Allah without His authorization. And their refuge will be the Fire, and wretched is the residence of the wrongdoers.
003|152|Allah fulfilled His promise to you when, by His permission, you were on the verge of defeating them. But you faltered, disputed, and disobeyed after He had shown you what you longed for. Some of you sought the worldly life, while others sought the Hereafter. Then He diverted you from them to test you. But He has since pardoned you. Allah is gracious to the believers.
003|153|When you were fleeing, without looking back, while the Messenger was calling you from behind, He inflicted upon you one distress after another, so you would not grieve over what you missed or what befell you. Allah is fully aware of what you do.
003|154|After the setback, He sent down tranquility upon you. A slumber overcame some of you, while others were concerned only about themselves, harboring misconceptions about Allah—thoughts of ignorance. They asked, “Do we have any say in the matter?” Say, “The entire affair rests with Allah.” They conceal within themselves what they don’t disclose to you. They say, “If we had control over the situation, we wouldn’t have been killed here.” Say, “Even if you had been inside your homes, those destined to be killed would have met their end.” Thus, Allah tests your inner selves and purifies your hearts. Allah is aware of the innermost thoughts.
003|155|Those of you who turned back on the day the two armies met, Satan caused them to stumble due to some of their deeds. But Allah has forgiven them. Allah is Forgiving and Forbearing.
003|156|O you who believe, don’t be like those who disbelieve, speaking of their brethren who marched in the land, or went on the offensive, “Had they stayed with us, they wouldn’t have died or been killed.” Allah makes this a source of regret in their hearts. Allah gives life and brings death, and Allah is observant of what you do.
003|157|If you are killed or die in Allah’s cause, surely Allah’s forgiveness and mercy are better than what they accumulate.
003|158|Whether you die or are killed, to Allah you will be gathered.
003|159|Due to the Mercy of Allah, you were gentle with them. Had you been harsh and hard-hearted, they would’ve dispersed from around you. So forgive them, pray for their forgiveness, and consult with them in the matter. Once you’ve decided, put your trust in Allah. Allah loves those who trust.
003|160|If Allah helps you, none can defeat you, and if He forsakes you, who else can assist you? Therefore, let the believers put their trust in Allah.
003|161|It is not for a prophet to defraud. Whoever cheats will bring his cheating with him on Resurrection Day. Then, every soul will be fully compensated for its deeds and won’t be wronged.
003|162|Is one who follows Allah’s approval like one who incurred Allah’s wrath and whose dwelling is Hell—a miserable destination?
003|163|These are distinct positions before Allah, and Allah sees what they do.
003|164|Allah has been gracious to the believers when He sent a Messenger from among them, who conveys His verses to them, purifies them, and teaches them the Scripture and wisdom. Before this, they were clearly astray.
003|165|When tragedy befell you, even though you had inflicted twice as much, you asked, “How did this happen?” Say, “It is from your own selves.” Allah has power over all things.
003|166|What transpired on the day the two armies met was, by Allah’s decree, to test the believers.
003|167|And to expose the hypocrites. They were told, “Come, fight in the path of Allah, or at least defend.” They responded, “If we knew how to fight, we would follow you.” On that day, they were nearer to disbelief than to belief. They say with their mouths what’s not in their hearts. Allah is fully aware of what they conceal.
003|168|Those who stayed behind said of their brothers, “If they had obeyed us, they wouldn’t have been killed.” Say, “Then fend off death from yourselves, if you are sincere.”
003|169|Don’t consider those who were killed in Allah’s cause as dead. Instead, they are alive, in the presence of their Lord, being provided for.
003|170|Rejoicing in what Allah bestowed upon them of His bounty, they are glad for those who haven’t yet joined them, because they will have no fear or sadness.
003|171|They rejoice in Allah’s favor and bounty, and that Allah won’t let the reward of the believers go to waste.
003|172|Those who respond to Allah and the Messenger, even in the face of adversity, and maintain their righteousness and devotion, are promised a grand reward.
003|173|Those to whom people said, “The people have amassed against you, so fear them,” it only increased their faith, and they responded, “Allah is sufficient for us, and what an excellent guardian He is.”
003|174|So they returned with a favor and bounty from Allah, and no harm touched them. They followed the pleasure of Allah; and Allah possesses great bounty.
003|175|It is only Satan who frightens his followers. So fear them not, but fear Me, if you are true believers.
003|176|Don’t grieve over those who rush into disbelief. They can’t harm Allah. Allah intends to give them no share in the Hereafter, and for them is a painful punishment.
003|177|Those who purchase disbelief at the cost of faith can’t harm Allah at all, and a severe punishment awaits them.
003|178|Don’t assume that the respite We grant the unbelievers is for their good. We only delay their punishment so they may increase in sin. And they will face a humiliating punishment.
003|179|Allah will not leave the believers in the condition you’re in until He distinguishes the wicked from the good. Nor would Allah disclose to you the unseen. However, Allah selects from His messengers whom He wills. So, believe in Allah and His messengers. If you maintain your faith and righteousness, you will receive an immense reward.
003|180|Let not those who withhold what Allah has given them of His bounty think it’s good for them. In fact, it’s detrimental to them. They will be besieged by what they hoarded on Resurrection Day. To Allah belongs the heritage of the heavens and the earth; and Allah is well-acquainted with what you do.
003|181|Allah has heard the statement of those who said, “Allah is impoverished, and we are wealthy.” We will record what they said, along with their unjust killing of the prophets, and We will say, “Taste the suffering of the blaze.”
003|182|This is because of what your hands have put forth. Allah is never unjust to the beings.
003|183|Those who say, “Allah covenanted with us that we shouldn’t believe in any messenger unless he brings us a sacrificial offering consumed by fire.” Say, “Surely, messengers have come to you before me with clear signs and with what you said. Why then did you kill them, if you are truthful?”
003|184|If they reject you, so were messengers before you also rejected. They came with clear signs, scriptures, and the Enlightening Book.
003|185|Every soul will taste death. Then, you will receive your full compensation on Resurrection Day. Whoever is swayed from the Fire and admitted to Paradise has succeeded. The life of this world is nothing but an enjoyment of delusion.
003|186|You will be tested in your possessions and yourselves, and you will hear many hurtful comments from those who were given the Scripture before you, and from the idolaters. But if you are patient and righteous, that will be a pivotal stance.
003|187|Allah took a covenant from those given the Scripture: “You must make it known to people and not conceal it.” Yet they threw it away behind their backs, selling it for a trivial price. Evil is what they’ve purchased!
003|188|Don’t think that those who take pride in their deeds, and they love to be praised for what they haven’t done, will evade punishment. A severe punishment awaits them.
003|189|To Allah belongs the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth. Allah has power over all things.
003|190|In the creation of the heavens and the earth, and the cycle of night and day, there are signs for those with discernment.
003|191|Those who remember Allah while standing, sitting, or on their sides, and reflect upon the creation of the heavens and the earth: “Our Lord, You didn’t create all this in vain. Glory be to You. Protect us from the torment of the Fire.”
003|192|“Our Lord, indeed, whomever You admit to the Fire, You’ve utterly disgraced. The wrongdoers have no helpers.”
003|193|“Our Lord, we’ve heard a caller calling to faith: ‘Believe in your Lord,’ and we have believed. Our Lord, forgive us of our sins, wipe away from us our misdeeds, and make us die with the virtuous.”
003|194|“Our Lord, fulfill what You’ve promised us through Your messengers, and don’t disgrace us on Resurrection Day. Surely, You never break Your promise.”
003|195|Their Lord responded to them, “I won’t allow the work of any worker among you, whether male or female, be wasted. You are from one another. Those who emigrated, were expelled from their homes, suffered in My cause, fought, and were killed—I will absolve them of their misdeeds, and I will admit them into Gardens through which rivers flow. This is a reward from Allah, and with Allah lies the best reward.”
003|196|Let not the activities of the unbelievers in the land deceive you.
003|197|It’s a brief enjoyment. Then their dwelling will be Hell—what a wretched resting place!
003|198|However, those who revere their Lord will have Gardens beneath which rivers flow, where they will dwell forever—a welcome from Allah. What is with Allah is best for the pure.
003|199|Among the People of the Scripture, there are some who believe in Allah, in what was revealed to you, and in what was revealed to them. They are humble towards Allah, they don’t sell Allah’s verses for a meager price. These will have their reward with their Lord. Allah is swift in reckoning.
003|200|O you who believe, be patient, vie in perseverance, stand firm, and be mindful of Allah, so that you may succeed.
004|001|O people, be conscious of your Lord, who created you from a single soul, and created from it its mate. From them both, He spread many men and women. Revere Allah, the one through whom you demand your mutual rights, and respect family relationships. Allah is always watchful over you.
004|002|To orphans, return their properties rightfully. Don’t substitute bad with good, nor absorb their wealth into your own. Indeed, it is a great sin.
004|003|But if you fear you can’t treat orphaned girls fairly, then marry women that seem good to you: two, three, or four. But if you fear you won’t be fair, then only one, or what your right hands possess. This is more likely to prevent you from committing injustice.
004|004|Give the women their dowries graciously. But if they willingly give up a portion of it, then consume it with good cheer and gratitude.
004|005|Don’t entrust your properties, which Allah made a means of support for you, to the weak-minded. But provide for them from it, clothe them, and speak to them kindly.
004|006|And test the orphans until they reach the age of marriage. If you find them to be of good judgment, release their wealth to them. Don’t consume it wastefully and hastily before they grow up. Whoever is well-off, let him abstain; whoever is poor, let him consume reasonably. When you hand over their properties to them, call witnesses. Allah is sufficient as a Reckoner.
004|007|Men have a share in what parents and close relatives leave behind, and women have a share in what parents and relatives leave behind, be it little or much—a prescribed share.
004|008|When relatives, orphans, and those in need are present at the distribution, give them something from it, and speak kindly to them.
004|009|Those who worry about leaving behind weak offspring should fear Allah and say correct words.
004|010|Those who consume the wealth of orphans unjustly, are only ingesting fire into their bellies, and they will be subjected to a blazing Hellfire.
004|011|Allah instructs you regarding your children: for a male, the share is equivalent to that of two females. If there are more than two daughters, they get two-thirds of what he leaves behind. If there is only one daughter, she gets half. As for the parents, each gets one-sixth of what he leaves behind if he had a child. If he had no children and his parents are the sole inheritors, his mother gets a third. But if he had brothers and sisters, then, his mother will get a sixth. This is after fulfilling any will or debt. You don’t know whether your parents or children are closer to you in benefit. These are Allah’s decrees. Allah is ever Knowing and Wise.
004|012|You get half of what your wives leave behind, if they had no children. If they had children, you get one-fourth of what they leave behind, after fulfilling any will or debt. They get a fourth of what you leave behind if you have no children. If you have children, they get one-eighth of what you leave behind, after fulfilling any will or debt. If a man or woman leaves neither parents nor children, but has a brother or sister, each of them gets a sixth. If there are more siblings, they share a third, after fulfilling any will or debt. Without causing harm. A command from Allah. And Allah is All-Knowing, Most Forbearing.
004|013|These are the limits set by Allah. Whoever obeys Allah and His Messenger, He will admit him into gardens through which rivers flow, to dwell there eternally. That is the supreme triumph.
004|014|However, whoever disobeys Allah and His Messenger, and transgresses His limits, will be thrown into a Fire, where he will dwell forever, and he will have a humiliating punishment.
004|015|If any of your women commit an immoral act, call upon four witnesses from among you against them. If they testify, confine them to the houses until death claims them, or Allah makes a way for them.
004|016|If two men among you commit it, then punish them. However, if they repent and reform, leave them alone. Allah is Accepting of Repentance, Most Merciful.
004|017|Allah accepts the repentance of those who do evil in ignorance and then repent shortly after that. To them, Allah will grant forgiveness. Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise.
004|018|However, repentance is not accepted from those who persist in wrongdoing, only to say, “Now I repent” when death is imminent, nor from those who die disbelieving. For them, We’ve prepared a severe punishment.
004|019|O you who believe, it’s not lawful for you to inherit women against their will. Nor should you coerce them to return anything you’ve given them—unless they commit a clear immoral act. Live with them in kindness. If you dislike them, it may well be that you dislike something in which Allah has placed much good.
004|020|If you wish to replace one wife with another, and you’ve given one of them a fortune, don’t take anything from it. Would you take it out of falsehood and blatant sin?
004|021|How could you take it back after having shared intimate relations and they received a solemn covenant from you?
004|022|Don’t marry the women your fathers had married, except what has already transpired; it’s an indecent act, shameful, and a vile path.
004|023|Forbidden to you are your mothers, daughters, sisters, paternal aunts, maternal aunts, brother’s daughters, sister’s daughters, nursing mothers, nursing sisters, mothers-in-law, and stepdaughters under your guardianship from wives with whom you’ve been intimate. If you haven’t been intimate with them, you are not blamed. Also the wives of your biological sons, and marrying two sisters simultaneously, unless it has already occurred. Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Merciful.
004|024|And all married women, except those whom you rightfully possess. This is a decree from Allah upon you. Beyond these, all others are lawful, provided you seek them with your wealth in a legal marriage, not in fornication. When you wish to enjoy them, give them their bridal gifts, as an obligation. You commit no wrong by mutually agreeing to any adjustments to these gifts. Allah is All-Knowing, Most Wise.
004|025|Those among you who can’t afford to marry free, believing women, may marry believing maids under your care. Allah is well aware of your faith; you are of one another. Marry them with their guardians’ permission, and give them their rightful dowries, in pursuit of virtue, not immorality or secret affairs. If they commit adultery after their marriage, their punishment is half that of free women. This is for those who fear falling into sin, but it’s better for you to be patient. Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
004|026|Allah wants to clarify for you, and to guide you to the ways of those who came before you, and to accept your repentance. Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise.
004|027|Allah intends to accept your repentance, but those who follow their desires desire you to deviate in a great deviation.
004|028|Allah intends to lighten your burdens, for the human being was created weak.
004|029|O you who believe, don’t consume each other’s wealth unjustly, but trade by mutual consent. And don’t kill yourselves, for Allah is Merciful to you.
004|030|Whoever commits such acts out of aggression and injustice, We will throw him in a Fire. And that’s easy for Allah.
004|031|If you avoid the major sins you’re forbidden, We will erase your misdeeds and admit you into a noble entrance.
004|032|Don’t covet what Allah favored some over others with. Men have a share in what they’ve earned, and women have a share in what they’ve earned. Ask Allah for His bounty, for Allah has full knowledge of everything.
004|033|To everyone, We’ve appointed beneficiaries in what parents and near relatives leave behind. As for those with whom you’ve pledged, give them their share. Allah is a witness to all things.
004|034|Men are the protectors and maintainers of women, as Allah has given some more than others, and because they spend from their wealth. Righteous women are obedient, guarding in absence what Allah would have them guard. those whose disobedience or ill-conduct you fear, advise them, separate from them in bed, and then strike them. If they obey you, seek no means against them. Allah is Exalted, Supreme.
004|035|If you fear a breach between a couple, appoint an arbitrator from his family and another from hers. If they desire reconciliation, Allah will reconcile them. Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise.
004|036|Worship Allah and associate nothing with Him. Honor your parents, relatives, orphans, those in need, near and distant neighbors, companions, travelers, and servants. Allah doesn’t love the arrogant and boastful.
004|037|Those who are stingy, encourage stinginess, and conceal what Allah has given them from His bounty—for the unbelievers, We’ve prepared a humiliating torment.
004|038|Those who spend their wealth to be seen by people, without faith in Allah and the Last Day. Whoever takes Satan as an ally—what a terrible ally!
004|039|What harm would befall them if they believed in Allah and the Last Day, and donated from what Allah has provided them? Allah is fully aware of them.
004|040|Allah doesn’t do injustice, even as much as an atom’s weight; while if there is a good deed, He multiplies it and gives from Himself a great reward.
004|041|How will it be, when We summon a witness from every community, and We bring you as a witness against these people?
004|042|On that Day, those who disbelieved and defied the Messenger will wish they were leveled with the earth. They won’t be able to conceal anything from Allah.
004|043|O you who believe, don’t approach prayer while intoxicated, until you know what you’re saying, nor while unclean—except when traveling—until you have bathed. If you are ill, on a journey, have relieved yourselves, or have been intimate with women, and can’t find water, find clean sand and wipe your faces and hands with it. Allah is Ever-Pardoning, Most Forgiving.
004|044|Haven’t you seen those who were given a portion of the Scripture, who purchase error and want you to lose the way?
004|045|But Allah is better aware of your enemies, and Allah is a sufficient protector, and Allah is a sufficient helper.
004|046|Among those who are Jewish, some distort words out of their contexts and say, “We hear and disobey,” and “Hear, but don’t listen,” and “Ra’ina,” twisting their tongues and defaming the religion. But if they had said, “We hear and we obey,” and “Listen,” and “Unzurna,” it would’ve been better for them and more upright. But Allah has cursed them for their disbelief, so they believe not, except for a few.
004|047|O you who were given the Scripture, believe in what We’ve revealed, confirming what’s already with you, before We obliterate faces and turn them backward or curse them as We cursed the Sabbath-breakers. Allah’s command is always executed.
004|048|Allah doesn’t forgive the association with Him, but He forgives anything less than that to whom He wills. Whoever associates partners with Allah has devised a grave sin.
004|049|Did you see those who claim purity for themselves? Instead, Allah purifies whom He wills, and they won’t be wronged even by the width of a thread.
004|050|See how they invent lies against Allah. That in itself is a clear sin.
004|051|Did you notice those who were given a portion of the Scripture? They believe in superstition and oppressive powers, even saying to the disbelievers, “These are better guided on the path than the believers.”
004|052|These are the ones whom Allah has cursed. Whomever Allah curses—you won’t find a helper for him.
004|053|Do they own a portion of the sovereignty? If so, they wouldn’t give others even a speck.
004|054|Or do they envy people for what Allah has granted them from His bounty? We gave the family of Abraham the Scripture, wisdom, and a grand kingdom.
004|055|Some of them believed in it, while others held back from it. Hell is a sufficient inferno.
004|056|Those who disbelieve in Our verses, We will scorch them in a Fire. Every time their skins are roasted through, We substitute them with new skins so they may taste the punishment. Indeed, Allah is ever Exalted in Might and Wise.
004|057|As for those who believe and do righteous deeds—We will admit them into gardens through which rivers flow, where they will abide forever. There, they will have purified spouses, and We will admit them into abundant shade.
004|058|Allah instructs you to return trusts to their rightful owners, and when you judge between people, judge with fairness. Allah’s instructions to you are excellent. Allah is All-Hearing, All-Seeing.
004|059|O you who believe, obey Allah, the Messenger, and those of authority among you. If you disagree on something, refer it to Allah and the Messenger if you truly believe in Allah and the Last Day. This is the best way and will result in the best outcome.
004|060|Did you notice those who claim to believe in what was revealed to you, and in what was revealed before you, yet they seek judgment from oppressive sources of law? Satan aims to lead them far astray.
004|061|When it is said to them, “Come to what Allah revealed, and to the Messenger,” you see the hypocrites turning away from you completely.
004|062|How about when a misfortune strikes them because of what they’ve done? Then they come to you, swearing by Allah, “We intended nothing but goodwill and conciliation.”
004|063|Those are the ones whom Allah knows what’s in their hearts. So, turn away from them, admonish them, and speak to them with insightful words.
004|064|We sent no Messenger, but to be obeyed by the leave of Allah. If they had only, when they wronged themselves, come to you and asked Allah’s forgiveness, and the Messenger had asked forgiveness for them, they would’ve found Allah Accepting of repentance, Most Merciful.
004|065|But no, by your Lord, they won’t believe until they seek your arbitration in their disputes, then find no resistance within themselves to your decisions and fully submit themselves.
004|066|Had We commanded them, “Lay down your lives,” or “Abandon your homes,” only a few would have complied. If they had done what they were advised, it would’ve been better for them and strengthened their conviction.
004|067|Then We would’ve rewarded them generously from Us.
004|068|And We would’ve guided them to a straight path.
004|069|Whoever obeys Allah and the Messenger will be among those whom Allah has blessed: the prophets, the truthful, the martyrs, and the righteous. What excellent companions they are!
004|070|This is the bounty from Allah, and sufficient is Allah as the All-Knowing.
004|071|O you who believe, take your precautions and advance in units or advance altogether.
004|072|Among you, is he who hesitates. If a disaster strikes you, he would say, “Allah has favored me, since I wasn’t martyred with them.”
004|073|Yet, should a bounty from Allah come your way, he would say, as if there was never any love between you and him, “I wish I had been with them, so I could have achieved a great victory.”
004|074|Therefore, let those who trade this worldly life for the Hereafter fight in Allah’s path. Whoever fights in Allah’s path, whether he is slain or victorious, We will grant him a great reward.
004|075|Why shouldn’t you fight in Allah’s path, when the oppressed among men, women, and children implore, “Our Lord, deliver us from this town of oppressive people, and appoint for us from You a protector and appoint for us from You a helper.”?
004|076|Those who believe fight in the cause of Allah, while those who disbelieve fight in the cause of tyranny. So, fight against Satan’s allies; surely, Satan’s strategies are weak.
004|077|Didn’t you see those who were told, “Hold back your hands, perform the prayer, and give the obligatory charity”? Yet, when fighting was prescribed for them, a group among them feared people as they should fear Allah, or even more so. They said, “Our Lord, why did You decree fighting upon us? Couldn’t You have postponed it for us for a little while?” Say, “The enjoyment of this world is fleeting, but the Hereafter is better for the righteous, and you won’t be wronged in the slightest.”
004|078|Wherever you may be, death will overtake you, even if you are in fortified towers. If they receive good, they say, “This is from Allah,” but if misfortune strikes them, they say, “This is from you.” Say, “All is from Allah.” So, what is wrong with these people, that they hardly understand any statement?
004|079|Whatever good befalls you is from Allah, and whatever ill befalls you is from yourself. We sent you as a messenger to the people, and Allah is sufficient as a witness.
004|080|Whoever obeys the Messenger has obeyed Allah. As for those who turn away, We didn’t send you as their overseer.
004|081|They profess obedience. But when they leave your presence, a group among them plans during the night something contrary to what you say. Allah writes down what they plan by night. Turn away from them then, and rely on Allah. Allah is enough as a trustee.
004|082|Why don’t they contemplate the Quran? Had it been from anyone other than Allah, they would’ve found many discrepancies in it.
004|083|When news of security or fear reaches them, they broadcast it. But if they had referred it to the Messenger and those of authority among them, those who can draw correct conclusions would’ve understood it. Were it not for Allah’s grace and mercy upon you, you would’ve followed Satan, save a few.
004|084|So, fight in the path of Allah—you are accountable only for yourself—and rouse the believers. Perhaps Allah will restrain the might of the unbelievers. Allah is the strongest in enforcing punishment and the most severe in assault.
004|085|Whoever intercedes for good will have a share therein, and whoever intercedes for evil will bear a part of its burden. Allah oversees everything.
004|086|When you are greeted, respond with a better greeting, or return it. Allah takes account of everything.
004|087|Allah—there is no deity but Him. He will gather you on Resurrection Day, about which there is no doubt. And who is more truthful than Allah in speech?
004|088|Why are you divided over the hypocrites, when Allah has cast them aside due to their deeds? Do you seek to guide those whom Allah has led astray? For those whom Allah misguides, you will find no way for them.
004|089|They wish you to disbelieve as they disbelieve, so you become equal. So, take not from among them allies until they emigrate in Allah’s path. If they turn away, capture and execute them wherever you find them; and take no ally or helper from among them.
004|090|Except for those who take refuge with a people with whom you have a treaty, or those who come to you, their hearts unwilling to fight you or their people. Had Allah willed, He could’ve given them power over you, and they would’ve fought you. But if they withdraw from you, don’t fight you, and offer you peace, Allah gives you no grounds against them.
004|091|You will find others who seek safety from you and their people. Yet, whenever they are returned to temptation, they fall into it. If they don’t withdraw from you, offer you peace, and restrain their hands, seize and kill them wherever you find them. Against these, We have given you a clear warrant.
004|092|It’s not for a believer to kill a believer, except by mistake. Whoever kills a believer accidentally, the compensation is to free a believing captive and pay compensation to his family, unless they remit it as a charity. If he belonged to a people hostile to you, yet was a believer, the atonement is to free a believing captive. If he belonged to a people with whom you have a treaty, compensation must be paid to his family, and a believing captive must be freed. If one lacks the means, fasting for two consecutive months—is a penance from Allah. Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise.
004|093|But whoever kills a believer intentionally, his recompense is Hell, where he will abide eternally. Allah’s wrath is upon him. He has cursed him and prepared for him a tremendous punishment.
004|094|O you who believe, when you set out in the cause of Allah, be discerning. And don’t say to one who greets you with peace, “You are not a believer,” pursuing the perishable goods of worldly life. You were like them before, until Allah bestowed His favor upon you. So, be discerning; Allah is always aware of what you do.
004|095|Those believers who sit idle, other than those with a disability, aren’t on par with those who strive in Allah’s path with their wealth and lives. Allah has given preference to the strivers with their wealth and lives over the inactive. Yet, to both, Allah promises good. However, Allah favors the strivers over the inactive, with a distinguished reward.
004|096|Degrees of rank from Him, forgiveness, and mercy. Allah is Ever Forgiving, Most Merciful.
004|097|The angels will take the souls of those who died wronging themselves saying, “What was your condition?” They will reply, “We were oppressed in the land.” They will then say, “Wasn’t Allah’s earth vast enough for you to emigrate?” For such individuals, their dwelling will be Hell—a terrible destination.
004|098|Except for the oppressed among men, women, and children, who can’t devise a plan nor find a way.
004|099|For these individuals, Allah may extend His forgiveness. Allah is Pardoning and Forgiving.
004|100|Whoever emigrates for Allah’s cause will find many places of refuge and abundance on earth. Whoever leaves his home, migrating towards Allah and His Messenger, and then death overtakes him—Allah assures his reward. Allah is Ever Forgiving, Most Merciful.
004|101|While traveling through the land, you are not at fault for shortening your prayers, particularly if you fear an attack from the unbelievers. The unbelievers are your clear adversaries.
004|102|When you’re among them, leading them in prayer, let a group of them stand with you, armed. After they’ve prostrated, they should withdraw, allowing another group that has not yet prayed to come forward and pray with you. They should remain vigilant and keep their weapons ready. Those who disbelieve wish that you would neglect your weapons and your baggage, so they can launch a surprise attack. If rain or illness prevents you, there’s no blame upon you for setting aside your weapons. However, remain cautious. Allah has prepared a humiliating punishment for the unbelievers.
004|103|Once the prayer is concluded, remember Allah while standing, sitting, or lying on your sides. When you are secure, establish the prayer. Prayer is a mandatory obligation for believers at prescribed times.
004|104|Don’t weaken in pursuit of the enemy. If you are suffering, they, too, are suffering. And you expect from Allah what they don’t expect. Allah is Knowing and Wise.
004|105|We revealed the Scripture to you in truth, so that you may judge between people according to what Allah has shown you. Don’t be an advocate for the treacherous.
004|106|And ask Allah for forgiveness, for Allah is Ever Forgiving, Most Merciful.
004|107|And don’t argue for those who deceive themselves. Allah doesn’t love the deceitful sinner.
004|108|They may hide from people, but they can’t hide from Allah. He is with them when they plan at night with words He disapproves of. Allah encompasses all their actions.
004|109|Here you are, arguing on their behalf in this life, but who will argue on their behalf before Allah on Resurrection Day, or who will be their advocate?
004|110|Whoever commits a sin or wrongs himself, then seeks forgiveness from Allah, will find Allah Forgiving and Merciful.
004|111|Whoever earns a wrong earns it against himself. Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise.
004|112|Whoever commits wrongdoing or a sin, and then blames an innocent person, has taken on a slander and clear sin.
004|113|If it wasn’t for Allah’s grace and mercy upon you, a group from among them would’ve attempted to mislead you. However, they only mislead themselves. And they won’t harm you at all. Allah revealed to you the Scripture and wisdom, and He taught you what you didn’t know. Allah’s grace upon you is immense.
004|114|No good comes from much of their private conversations, except those who enjoin charity, kindness, or reconciliation among people. Whosoever does this seeking Allah’s approval, We will grant him a great reward.
004|115|Whoever opposes the Messenger, after the guidance has become clear to him, and follows a path other than that of the believers, We will leave him in the direction he has chosen and consign him to Hell—a dreadful destination.
004|116|Allah doesn’t forgive the association of partners with Him, but He forgives anything less than that to whomever He wills. Whoever associates partners with Allah has strayed far off course.
004|117|They invoke, in His stead, only females. They invoke none other than a defiant devil.
004|118|Allah has cursed him. He said, “I will take a portion of Your servants.”
004|119|“I will mislead them, I will entice them, I will command them to slit the ears of cattle, I will command them and they will change the creation of Allah.” Whoever takes Satan as a friend instead of Allah has suffered an evident loss.
004|120|Satan makes promises to them and arouses desires in them. But Satan promises them nothing but deceit.
004|121|These are the ones whose place is Hell, and they will find no way to escape from it.
004|122|However, those who believe and do righteous deeds, We will admit them into gardens through which rivers flow, where they will reside forever. This is Allah’s true promise, and who is truer in speech than Allah?
004|123|It’s not according to your wishful thinking, nor the wishful thinking of the People of the Bible. Whoever does wrong will be paid for it, and will find no protector or helper against Allah.
004|124|And whoever works righteousness, male or female, and is a believer—these will enter Paradise, and they won’t be wronged even as much as a speck.
004|125|Who is better in religion than one who surrenders his whole being to Allah, acts virtuously, and follows the monotheistic creed of Abraham? Allah chose Abraham as a cherished friend.
004|126|Everything within the heavens and the earth belongs to Allah, and Allah encompasses all things.
004|127|They ask you for a legal ruling concerning women. Say, “Allah gives you a legal ruling about them, as well as what was communicated to you in the Scripture concerning orphan girls whom you deny what’s prescribed for them and yet you wish to marry, and concerning the vulnerable among children. You are urged to treat orphans with fairness.” Whatever good you do, Allah is fully aware of it.
004|128|If a woman fears ill-treatment or estrangement from her husband, there is no fault in them if they reconcile. Reconciliation is always preferable, yet human nature gravitates towards selfishness. If you behave with righteousness and reverence, Allah is Ever-Aware of what you do.
004|129|You will never be able to treat women with perfect fairness, no matter how sincere your intentions. Therefore, don’t incline excessively towards one and leave the other hanging. And if you act righteously and practice pietys—Allah is ever Forgiving, Most Merciful.
004|130|If they do separate, Allah will suffice each from His bounty. Allah is All-Encompassing, All-Wise.
004|131|Everything in the heavens and on earth belongs to Allah. We’ve instructed those who were given the Scripture before you, and also you, to fear Allah. If you disbelieve, know that everything in the heavens and on earth belongs to Allah. Allah is Independent and Praiseworthy.
004|132|Everything in the heavens and on earth is Allah’s, and Allah is enough to rely upon.
004|133|If He wills, He can eliminate you, O people, and bring about others. Allah has the power to do this.
004|134|Whoever desires the reward of this world—with Allah is the reward of the world and the Hereafter. Allah is All-Hearing, All-Seeing.
004|135|O you who believe, stand firmly for justice, as witnesses to Allah, even if against yourselves, or your parents, or your relatives. Whether one is rich or poor, Allah is more worthy of both. So, don’t follow personal inclination to avoid justice. If you distort or refuse—Allah is fully aware of what you do.
004|136|O you who believe, believe in Allah and His Messenger, and the Scripture He revealed to His Messenger, and the Scripture He revealed before. Whoever denies Allah, His angels, His Scriptures, His messengers, and the Last Day, has strayed far away.
004|137|Those who believe, then disbelieve, then believe, then disbelieve and increase in disbelief—Allah will neither forgive them nor guide them on any path.
004|138|Announce to the hypocrites that they will have a painful torment.
004|139|Those who take unbelievers as allies instead of the believers. Do they seek with them honor and power? All honor and power belong to Allah alone.
004|140|He revealed to you in the Scripture that when you hear Allah’s verses being denied and ridiculed, don’t sit with them until they change the topic, lest you become like them. Allah will gather the hypocrites and the unbelievers in Hell, all together.
004|141|Those who eagerly await your downfall: when Allah’s victory is granted to you, they question, “Were we not with you?” Yet, if the unbelievers have a moment of success, they ask, “Didn’t we stand by your side and protect you from the believers?” On the Day of Resurrection, Allah will judge between you. Allah won’t allow the unbelievers to triumph over the believers.
004|142|The hypocrites seek to deceive Allah, but He causes them to be deceived. When they rise for prayer, they do so lethargically, merely to be seen by others, and they barely remember Allah.
004|143|They are indecisive, neither with these nor with those. You will find no path for those whom Allah leads astray.
004|144|O you who believe, don’t favor unbelievers over believers. Do you wish to provide Allah with clear evidence against yourselves?
004|145|The hypocrites will be in the lowest depths of the Fire, and you will find no one to help them.
004|146|Except for those who repent, reform their ways, firmly adhere, and sincerely dedicate their faith to Allah. These will be among the believers, and Allah will grant the believers a magnificent reward.
004|147|What would Allah do with your punishment if you are grateful and believe? And ever is Allah Appreciative and Knowing.
004|148|Allah does not like the public mention of evil, except when someone has been wronged. Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.
004|149|Whether you publicly declare a good deed or hide it, or pardon an evil act—Allah is Pardoner and Competent.
004|150|Those who deny Allah and His messengers, and wish to separate between Allah and His messengers, saying, “We believe in some and disbelieve in others,” and wish to adopt a way in between.
004|151|These are the true disbelievers, and We prepared for the disbelievers a humiliating punishment.
004|152|But those who believe in Allah and His messengers, and make no distinction between any of them, to them, We will grant their rewards. Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
004|153|The People of the Scripture demand that you send down upon them a book from the heavens. They demanded even more of Moses, saying, “Show us Allah visibly.” A thunderbolt struck them for their audacity. Then, they worshiped the calf even after clear signs had come to them. Still, We forgave them. Furthermore, We granted Moses evident authority.
004|154|We held the mountain over them as a testament to their covenant, and We commanded them, “Enter the gate humbly.” We also commanded: “Violate not the Sabbath”, and We took a solemn pledge from them.
004|155|Yet, they broke their pledge, denied Allah’s revelations, unjustly killed the prophets, and said, “Our hearts are sealed.” Allah sealed them due to their disbelief, so they believe only a little.
004|156|They disbelieved and said a grave false charge against Mary.
004|157|And they declared, “We killed the Messiah, Jesus, son of Mary, the Messenger of Allah.” Yet, in reality, they neither killed nor crucified him—but it was made to appear to them so. Those who argue this are full of doubts, lacking any definitive knowledge, and relying solely on conjecture. Certainly, they didn’t kill him.
004|158|Rather, Allah raised him up to Himself. Allah is Mighty and Wise.
004|159|There are none of the People of the Scripture but will believe in him before his death, and on the Day of Resurrection, he will bear witness against them.
004|160|For the wrongdoings of the Jews and their frequent straying from Allah’s path, We prohibited them from certain good things that were previously allowed.
004|161|And for their taking of usury while they had been forbidden from it, and unjustly consuming people’s wealth. We prepared a severe punishment for those who persist in disbelief.
004|162|But those firm in knowledge among them and the believers believe in what was revealed to you and what was revealed before you. Those who perform prayers, give charity and believe in Allah and the Last Day—upon them, We will bestow a great reward.
004|163|We revealed to you, as We revealed to Noah and the prophets after him. We also revealed to Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, the Tribes, Jesus, Job, Jonah, Aaron, and Solomon. And to David, We gave the Psalms.
004|164|We’ve told you the stories of some messengers, while of others, We haven’t. Allah spoke directly to Moses.
004|165|Messengers as bearers of good news and warning, so that people would have no excuse before Allah after the messengers. Allah is All-Powerful, All-Wise.
004|166|Allah Himself bears witness to what He revealed to you. He revealed it with His knowledge, and the angels also bear witness. Yet, Allah is sufficient as a Witness.
004|167|Those who disbelieve and hinder others from Allah’s path have gone far astray.
004|168|Those who disbelieve and commit wrong—Allah won’t forgive them, nor will He guide them to a path.
004|169|Except the path of Hell, to abide therein forever. And that, for Allah, is always easy.
004|170|O people, the Messenger has come to you with the truth from your Lord, so believe; it is better for you. But if you disbelieve—to Allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and earth. Allah is Ever-Knowing, All-Wise.
004|171|O People of the Bible, don’t exaggerate in your religion, and say only the truth about Allah. Jesus Christ, the son of Mary, is the Messenger of Allah, His Word bestowed upon Mary, and a spirit of Him. So believe in Allah and His messengers, and don’t say, “Trinity.” Cease—it is better for you. Allah is but One God. Exalted is He—He is far above having a son. To Him belongs all that’s in the heavens and on earth, and Allah is enough as a Trustee.
004|172|The Messiah would never disdain to be a servant of Allah, nor would the nearest angels. Whosoever disdains His worship and is arrogant, He will gather them all to Himself.
004|173|Those who believe and perform righteous deeds—He will reward them in full and give them more from His grace. But those who disdain His worship and behave arrogantly, He will punish them with a severe punishment, and they won’t find for themselves any protector or helper apart from Allah.
004|174|O people, a persuasive evidence has come to you from your Lord, and We sent down to you a clear light.
004|175|Those who believe in Allah and hold firmly to Him, He will admit them into His mercy and favor, and He will guide them to Himself on a Straight Path.
004|176|They seek a legal ruling from you. Say, “Allah gives you a legal ruling concerning those who die without heirs. If a person dies childless and has a sister, she inherits half of what he left behind. If she dies childless, he inherits from her. If there are two sisters, they receive two-thirds of what he left behind. If there are brothers and sisters, the male gets the share of two females.” Allah makes this clear for you, lest you go err. Allah is fully aware of everything.
005|001|O you who believe, fulfill your obligations. Lawful for you are the animals of livestock, except those explicitly forbidden. However, hunting is not permitted while you are on pilgrimage. Allah ordains what He wills.
005|002|O you who believe, do not desecrate the symbols of Allah, the Sacred Month, the offerings, the garlands, or those journeying to the Sacred House seeking blessings and approval from their Lord. Once your pilgrimage has concluded, you may hunt. Don’t let the hatred of a people who barred you from the Sacred Mosque incite you to aggression. Instead, cooperate in righteousness and piety, not in sin and hostility. Be mindful of Allah, for Allah is severe in punishment.
005|003|You are forbidden to consume carrion, blood, pork, and anything consecrated to other than Allah. Also banned are animals that have died from strangulation, blunt force, a fall, goring, or those partially consumed by wild animals—unless you can purify them—and those slaughtered on altars, and the practice of divining arrows. These are sinful practices. Today, the unbelievers have despaired of your religion, so don’t fear them, but fear Me. Today, I have perfected your religion for you, completed My favor upon you, and chosen Submission as your religion. If anyone is compelled by hunger, without deliberately intending to sin, then surely, Allah is Most Forgiving, Most Merciful.
005|004|They ask you what’s lawful for them. Say, “All good things are lawful for you, including what your trained hunting animals catch for you.” You train them according to what Allah has taught you. Eat what they catch for you, and pronounce Allah’s name over it. Be conscious of Allah. Allah is swift in reckoning.
005|005|Today, all good things have been made lawful for you. The food of those given the Scripture is lawful for you, and your food is lawful for them. Lawful for you are virtuous believing women and virtuous women from among those who were given the Scripture before you, provided you give them their due compensation, and marry them honorably, not committing adultery or taking secret lovers. Whoever disbelieves, his work is in vain, and in the Hereafter, he will be among the losers.
005|006|O you who believe, when you prepare for prayer, wash your faces, and your hands up to the elbows, and wipe your heads, and your feet to the ankles. If you’re in a state of impurity, then purify yourselves. But if you are ill, on a journey, have relieved yourselves, or have been intimate with women, and you can’t find water, resort to clean earth and wipe your faces and hands with it. Allah doesn’t intend to burden you, but He intends to purify you and complete His favor upon you, so that you may give thanks.
005|007|Remember Allah’s blessing upon you and His covenant He made with you, when you pledged, “We hear and we obey.” Be mindful of Allah, for Allah knows the contents of the hearts.
005|008|O you who have faith, stand out firmly for Allah, and bear witness with justice. Don’t let your animosity towards a people provoke you into not acting justly. Always be just, for it is closer to piety. Be conscious of Allah; Allah is fully aware of what you do.
005|009|Allah has promised those who believe and do good deeds forgiveness and a great reward.
005|010|However, those who disbelieve and reject Our signs—these are the inhabitants of Hellfire.
005|011|O you who believe, remember Allah’s favor upon you, when some people intended to harm you, but He restrained their hands from you. Be mindful of Allah, and let the faithful trust in Allah.
005|012|In the past, Allah made a covenant with the Children of Israel, and We sent from among them twelve leaders. Allah said, “I am with you. If you establish prayer, give charity, believe in My messengers, assist them, and lend Allah a good loan, I will absolve you of your sins and admit you into Gardens through which rivers flow. However, anyone among you who disbelieves after this has deviated from the right path.”
005|013|However, We cursed them and hardened their hearts because they violated their covenant. They altered the meanings of words and neglected a portion of what they were reminded of. You will consistently witness deceit from them, except for a few of them. Yet pardon them and overlook their misdeeds. Allah loves those who do good.
005|014|From those who say, “We are Christians,” We received their covenant, but they forgot a portion of what they were reminded of. So We sowed dissension and enmity among them until Resurrection Day. Then, Allah will inform them of everything they did.
005|015|O People of the Scripture, our Messenger has come to you, revealing to you much of what you concealed from the Scripture; and overlooking much. A light and a clear book have come to you from Allah.
005|016|Allah guides with it whoever follows His approval into the ways of peace, and brings them out from darkness into the light by His decree, and guides them to a straight path.
005|017|Those who say, “Allah is Christ, the Son of Mary,” have disbelieved. Say, “Who could prevent Allah, if He intended to destroy Christ, son of Mary, his mother, and everyone on earth?” To Allah belongs the sovereignty of the heavens, the earth, and everything in between. He creates whatever He wills. Allah is capable of everything.
005|018|The Jews and the Christians say, “We are the children of Allah and His beloved.” Say, “Then why does He punish you for your sins?” In reality, you are but humans among those He created. He forgives whom He wills, and He punishes whom He wills. To Allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth and everything between them, and to Him is the final return.
005|019|O People of the Scripture, Our Messenger has come to you, making things clear to you after a period of no messengers, so you wouldn’t say, “No bearer of good news or warner has come to us.” Surely, a bearer of good news and a warner did come to you, and Allah has power over all things.
005|020|And when Moses said to his people, “O my people, remember Allah’s blessings upon you, when He appointed prophets among you, made you kings, and gave you what He never gave any other people.”
005|021|“O my people, enter the Holy Land that Allah assigned to you, and don’t retreat, lest you become losers.”
005|022|They responded, “O Moses, inside it is a people of great strength. We won’t enter it until they come out of it. If they leave it, then we will enter.”
005|023|Two men who were fearful, upon whom Allah had bestowed favor, said, “Enter upon them through the door; once you do, you will be victorious. And put your trust in Allah, if you are believers.”
005|024|They said, “O Moses, we will never enter it as long as they are in it. Go, you and your Lord, and fight. We will be staying here.”
005|025|He lamented, “My Lord, I have control only over myself and my brother, so separate us from the disobedient people.”
005|026|He said, “It will be forbidden to them for forty years. They will wander in the land. So don’t feel sorrow over the rebellious people.”
005|027|And narrate to them the true story of the two sons of Adam: when each presented an offering, it was accepted from one but not from the other. The latter said, “I will surely kill you.” The former responded, “Allah accepts only from the righteous.”
005|028|“Even if you stretch your hand to kill me, I won’t stretch my hand to kill you, for I fear Allah, the Lord of the worlds.
005|029|I would rather you bear my sin and your sin, and you will become of the dwellers of Fire. That’s the recompense for the wrongdoers.”
005|030|His soul facilitated the killing of his brother, and he killed him, and thus he became one of the losers.
005|031|Then, Allah sent a raven, which was scratching the ground, to show him how to cover his brother’s body. He cried out, “Woe to me! I couldn’t be like this raven and bury my brother’s body.” And he became full of regret.
005|032|Because of that, We ordained for the Children of Israel that whoever takes a life—unless it’s for murder or for spreading corruption on earth—it’s as if he has killed all humanity. And whoever saves a life, it’s as if he has saved all of humanity. Our messengers came to them with clear signs, yet many of them still commit excesses on earth.
005|033|The penalty for those who wage war against Allah and His Messenger and endeavor to spread corruption on earth is execution, crucifixion, amputation of hands and feet on opposite sides, or exile from the land. This is their disgrace in this world, and in the Hereafter, they will have a great punishment.
005|034|Except for those who repent before you apprehend them. Know that Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
005|035|O you who believe, be conscious of Allah, seek the means to approach Him, and strive in His path, so that you may succeed.
005|036|Even if the unbelievers possessed everything on earth, and twice as much, and offered it to ransom themselves from the suffering on Resurrection Day, it wouldn’t be accepted from them. They will have a painful punishment.
005|037|They will wish to get out of the Fire, but they won’t be able to. Their punishment will be everlasting.
005|038|As for the thieves, both male and female, cut off their hands in retribution for what they’ve earned—a deterrent from Allah. Allah is Mighty and Wise.
005|039|But whoever repents after his wrongdoing and reforms, surely, Allah will accept his repentance. Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
005|040|Do you not know that the dominion of the heavens and the earth belongs to Allah? He punishes whom He wills and forgives whom He wills. Allah has power over all things.
005|041|O Messenger, let not those who rush into disbelief grieve you—those who say with their mouths, “We believe,” but their hearts don’t believe. Among the Jews, listeners to lies, receptive to a different people who didn’t come to you. They alter words from their places, saying, “If you are given this, accept it; but if not, then beware.” If Allah intends someone to be misguided, you won’t possess for him any protection against Allah. These are the ones whose hearts Allah does not intend to purify. For them, there is disgrace in this world, and in the Hereafter, they will have a severe punishment.
005|042|Shrewd listeners of falsehood, devourers of what’s unlawful. If they come to you, either judge between them or turn away from them. If you turn away, they can’t harm you at all. But if you judge, judge between them with justice. Allah loves those who act justly.
005|043|Why do they seek your judgment when they have the Torah, which contains Allah’s Law? Yet, even after that, they turn away. These are not believers.
005|044|We revealed the Torah, in which is guidance and light. The prophets who submitted ruled the Jews by it, as did the rabbis and scholars, as they were entrusted with the guardianship of Allah’s Book and witnessed it. So, don’t fear people, but fear Me, and don’t sell My verses for a small price. Those who don’t judge according to what Allah revealed are the unbelievers.
005|045|We wrote for them in it: a life for a life, an eye for an eye, a nose for a nose, an ear for an ear, a tooth for a tooth, and wounds equal in retribution. Yet, whoever waives it out of charity, it will serve as atonement for him. Those who don’t rule according to what Allah revealed are the wrongdoers.
005|046|Following them, We sent Jesus, son of Mary, confirming the Torah that preceded him. And We gave him the Gospel, containing guidance and light, and confirmed the earlier Torah, and guidance and admonition for the righteous.
005|047|Let the people of the Gospel judge according to what Allah revealed therein. Those who don’t rule according to what Allah revealed are the sinners.
005|048|To you, We revealing the book with truth, confirming what preceded it and prevailing over it. So, judge between them according to what Allah has revealed, and don’t follow their whims, which deviate from the truth that has come to you. For each, We’ve established a law and a path. If Allah had willed, He could’ve made you a single community, but He tests you through what He gave you. So, race towards goodness. To Allah is your return, all of you, and He will then inform you about your disagreements.
005|049|Judge between them according to what Allah revealed, and don’t follow their desires. Be wary of them, lest they tempt you away from some parts of what Allah has revealed to you. If they turn away, know that Allah intends to strike them with some of their sins. In fact, many people are corrupt.
005|050|Do they desire the ruling of the era of Ignorance? But who is better than Allah in judgment for a people who have certainty?
005|051|O you who have believed, don’t take the Jews and the Christians as allies; some of them are allies of one another. Whoever among you allies with them, then he becomes one of them. Allah doesn’t guide the wrongdoers.
005|052|You will see those with diseased hearts rushing amongst them, saying, “We fear that a misfortune might strike us.”But it may be that Allah will bring about victory or a decision from His command, and they will become regretful for what they’ve been concealing.
005|053|Then the believers will say, “Are these the ones who swore by Allah, with their strongest oaths, that they are with you?” Their deeds have become in vain, and they’ve become losers.
005|054|O you who believe, whoever of you renounces his faith, Allah will bring a people whom He loves and who love Him, humble towards the believers, stern towards the unbelievers, striving in the path of Allah, and not fearing the blame of any critic. That is the bounty from Allah, He bestows it on whom He wills. Allah is All-Encompassing, All-Knowing.
005|055|Your ally is none but Allah, His Messenger, and those who believe—those who establish prayer, give charity, and bow down.
005|056|Whoever allies with Allah, His Messenger, and the believers—indeed, the party of Allah will be the victorious.
005|057|O you who believe, don’t take as allies those who ridicule your religion and treat it as a game, be they from those who received the Scripture before you, or from the unbelievers. Be mindful of Allah, if you are believers.
005|058|When you call for prayer, they treat it as a jest and a diversion. This is because they are people who lack understanding.
005|059|Say, “O People of the Scripture, do you resent us merely because we believe in Allah, in what was revealed to us, and in what was revealed before, and because many among you are sinful?”
005|060|Say, “Shall I inform you of something worse than that as a penalty from Allah? Those whom Allah has cursed, upon whom His wrath has descended, some of whom He transformed into apes and pigs, and those who worship false gods. These are in a worse position and further astray from the straight path.”
005|061|When they come to you, they say, “We believe,” yet they enter with disbelief and exit the same way. But Allah is Best Aware of what they hide.
005|062|You see many of them hastening into sin, hostility, and consuming what’s unlawful. How terrible is what they’ve been doing.
005|063|If only the rabbis and scholars restrained them from their sinful speech and their consumption of the forbidden. How wretched is what they’ve been producing.
005|064|The Jews say, “Allah’s hand is tied up.” Their hands are tied up, and they are cursed for what they say. Rather, His hands are outstretched; He gives as He wills. The revelations sent to you from your Lord only increase most of them in rebellion and disbelief. We instilled animosity and hatred among them until Resurrection Day. Whenever they kindle the fire of war, Allah extinguishes it. They endeavor to spread corruption on earth, but Allah doesn’t love the corrupters.
005|065|If the People of the Scripture had believed and acted righteously, We would have blotted out their sins and admitted them into Gardens of Delight.
005|066|If they had upheld the Torah, the Gospel, and what was revealed to them from their Lord, they would’ve consumed from above them and from beneath their feet. Among them is a community that’s balanced, but many of them—evil is what they do.
005|067|O Messenger, convey what was revealed to you from your Lord. If you don’t, then you wouldn’t have conveyed His message. Allah will protect you from the people. Allah does not guide the disbelieving people.
005|068|Say, “O People of the Scripture, you are on nothing unless you uphold the Torah, the Gospel, and what was revealed to you from your Lord.” What was revealed to you from your Lord increases the majority of them in excessive wrongdoing and disbelief. So, don’t grieve over the disbelieving people.
005|069|Surely, those who believe, the Jews, the Sabeans, and the Christians—whoever believes in Allah and the Last Day and acts righteously—will have no fear, nor will they grieve.
005|070|We made a covenant with the Children of Israel and sent them messengers. Whenever a messenger brought them something their souls didn’t fancy, they denied some of them and killed others.
005|071|They assumed there would be no consequences, so they turned blind and deaf. Yet Allah turned to them in forgiveness; then again, many of them turned blind and deaf. Surely, Allah sees all their actions.
005|072|Those who say, “The Messiah, son of Mary, is Allah,” are committing blasphemy. Christ said, “O Children of Israel, worship Allah, my Lord, and your Lord. Whoever associates partners with Allah, Allah will deny him Paradise, and his dwelling will be the Fire. The wrongdoers will have no saviors.”
005|073|Those who say, “Allah is third of three,” are in clear disbelief. There is no god except the One God. If they don’t desist from making such statements, a severe punishment will befall those among them who disbelieve.
005|074|Won’t they repent to Allah and ask His forgiveness? Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
005|075|The Messiah, son of Mary, was but a messenger, like the messengers before him, and his mother was a woman of virtue. They both used to eat food. We make the truth clear to them, yet look how they are being deluded.
005|076|Say, “Do you worship, besides Allah, something that lacks the power to harm or benefit you?” But Allah is the All-Hearing, All-Knowing.
005|077|Say, “O People of the Scripture, don’t exaggerate in your religion beyond the truth, and don’t follow the whims of people who went astray before, led many astray, and strayed from the straight path.”
005|078|Those who disbelieved among the Children of Israel were cursed by the tongue of David and Jesus, son of Mary. That was because they disobeyed and used to transgress.
005|079|They didn’t discourage each other from committing wrongs. Their deeds are reprehensible.
005|080|You will see many of them befriending those who disbelieve. Their wickedness prompts this, which incurs Allah’s wrath upon them, resulting in their perpetual suffering.
005|081|If they had believed in Allah, the Prophet, and what was revealed to him, they wouldn’t have taken them as allies. But many of them are defiant and disobedient.
005|082|Among all the people, you will find the Jews and the polytheists to be the most hostile towards the believers. However, you will find the closest in affection to the believers those who say, “We are Christians”. This is because among them are priests and pastors, and they aren’t arrogant.
005|083|When they hear what was revealed to the Messenger, you see their eyes overflowing with tears, as they recognize the truth in it. They exclaim, “Our Lord, we have believed, so count us among the witnesses.”
005|084|“Why shouldn’t we believe in Allah, and in the truth that has come to us, and aspire that our Lord will admit us among the righteous people?”
005|085|For what they say, Allah has rewarded them with Gardens through which rivers flow, where they will reside forever. This is the reward of the righteous.
005|086|However, those who disbelieve and reject Our signs will be the inhabitants of Hellfire.
005|087|O you who believe, don’t prohibit the good things Allah made lawful for you, and don’t transgress. Allah doesn’t love the aggressors.
005|088|Consume from what Allah has provided you—lawful and wholesome—and be conscious of Allah, in whom you believe.
005|089|Allah won’t hold you accountable for your irrelevant oaths, but He will for those you make intentionally. The atonement for them is to feed ten needy people with the average of what you feed your own families, clothe them, or liberate a captive. Those who can’t afford this should fast for three days. This is the atonement for your sworn oaths. So, fulfill your promises. In this way, Allah clarifies His revelations to you, so that you may give thanks.
005|090|O you who believe, intoxicants, gambling, idolatry, and divination are abominations of Satan’s handiwork. So stay away from them, that you may be successful.
005|091|Satan intends to incite enmity and hatred among you through intoxicants and gambling, preventing you from remembering Allah and prayer. Won’t you then abstain?
005|092|Obey Allah and obey the Messenger, and be cautious. If you turn away, know that Our Messenger only has to convey the message clearly.
005|093|Those who believe and do righteous deeds won’t be blamed for what they had consumed in the past, provided they maintain righteousness, believe, do good deeds, uphold piety and faith, and continue to be virtuous and do good. Allah loves those who do good.
005|094|O you who believe, Allah will test you through some game animals that your hands and spears obtain. In this manner, Allah distinguishes those who fear Him unseen. Whoever transgresses after this will have a severe punishment.
005|095|O you who believe, don’t kill game while you are in the state of pilgrimage sanctity. Whoever among you kills it intentionally, the penalty is a domestic animal, equivalent to the one he killed, judged by two just men among you, to be delivered to the Kaaba as an offering, or expiation by feeding the needy, or its equivalent in fasting, so that he may taste the consequences of his action. Allah has pardoned what is past. But whoever repeats it, Allah will take retribution from him. Allah is Mighty, Capable of Retribution.
005|096|The catch of the sea and its food is permissible for you, a provision for you and for travelers. But you are forbidden to hunt on land while you are in the state of pilgrimage sanctity. Fear Allah, before whom you will be gathered.
005|097|Allah has designated the Kaaba, the Sacred House, as a sanctuary for people, along with the sacred months, the sacrificial animals, and the garlands. This is so that you may know that Allah knows what’s in the heavens and on earth, and that Allah is All-Knowing of all things.
005|098|Know that Allah is severe in penalty, yet also Forgiving and Merciful.
005|099|The sole duty of the Messenger is to convey the message. Allah knows what you reveal and what you keep hidden.
005|100|Say, “Insincerity and sincerity aren’t equal, even if the abundance of insincerity may impress you. So, revere Allah, O people of discernment, so you may thrive.”
005|101|O you who believe, don’t inquire about matters that, if they were made apparent to you, may distress you. But if you ask about them while the Quran is being revealed, they will be made clear to you. Allah has pardoned that; Allah is Forgiving and Forbearing.
005|102|Some people before you did ask such questions, and then became unbelievers because of it.
005|103|Allah didn’t institute the superstitions of Bahirah, Saibah, Wasilah, or Hami. Those who disbelieve invent lies about Allah, and most of them lack understanding.
005|104|When called to what Allah revealed and to the Messenger, they say, “What we found our ancestors following is good enough for us.” Even if their ancestors had no knowledge or guidance?
005|105|O you who believe, you are responsible for your own souls. Those who stray can’t harm you, if you are guided. To Allah is your return, all of you, and He will inform you about your deeds.
005|106|O you who believe, if death approaches any of you, let two just persons from among you bear witness to the will. Let two others bear witness if you’re traveling and death overtakes you. After the prayer, have them swear by Allah, stating, “We won’t alter our testimony for any price, even if it concerns a close relative, and we won’t conceal Allah’s testimony, for then we would be sinners.”
005|107|If it becomes apparent that the two witnesses are guilty of sin, replace them with two others who have a rightful claim. And have them swear by Allah, stating, “Our testimony is truer than theirs, and we won’t be biased, for then we would be unjust.”
005|108|This is more likely to ensure that they will give truthful testimony, or else their oaths may be refuted. So, fear Allah and listen carefully. Allah doesn’t guide the sinful.
005|109|On the Day when Allah will gather the messengers and ask, “What response did you receive?” They will reply, “We have no knowledge; You are the Knower of the unseen.”
005|110|Then Allah will say, “O Jesus, son of Mary, remember My favor upon you and your mother, when I supported you with the Holy Spirit. You spoke to the people in infancy and adulthood. I taught you the Scripture, wisdom, the Torah, and the Gospel. You shaped birds from clay by My permission, breathed into them, and they became birds, by My permission. You healed the blind and the lepers, and revived the dead, by My permission. Remember when I protected you from the Children of Israel, when you brought them the clear miracles, and the unbelievers among them said, ‘This is nothing but plain magic.’”
005|111|“When I inspired the disciples to believe in Me and My Messenger, they declared, ‘We have believed, and witness that we are in submission.’”
005|112|The disciples asked, ‘O Jesus, son of Mary, is your Lord able to send down to us a feast from heaven?’ He replied, ‘Fear Allah, if you are believers.’”
005|113|They said, “We wish to eat from it to reassure our hearts, to confirm that you’ve told us the truth, and to bear witness to it.”
005|114|Jesus, son of Mary, said, “O Allah, our Lord, send us a table spread from heaven, to serve as a festive occasion for us—for the first of us and the last—and as a sign from You. Provide for us, for You are the Best of Providers.”
005|115|Allah responded, “I will send it down to you. But if any of you disbelieve afterward, I will indeed inflict a punishment upon him the likes of which I have not inflicted upon anyone in the worlds.”
005|116|And when Allah said, “O Jesus, son of Mary, did you instruct people to take you and your mother as gods below Allah?” He will reply, “Glory be to You! It’s not for me to say what I have no right to.” Had I said it, You would’ve known it. You know what’s in my soul, yet I don’t know what’s in your soul. Indeed, You Alone are the Knower of all things unseen.
005|117|I only told them what You commanded me: ‘Worship Allah, my Lord, and your Lord.’ I was a witness over them as long as I was among them. But when You took me up, You were the Observer over them, and You are the Witness to everything.
005|118|If You punish them, they are Your servants; but if You forgive them, You are the Mighty and Wise.’”
005|119|Allah will then say, “This day the truthful will benefit from their truthfulness.” They will have Gardens through which rivers flow, where they will abide forever. Allah is pleased with them, and they are pleased with Him. This is the greatest triumph.
005|120|To Allah belongs the Kingdom of the heavens and the earth and all that’s within them, and He is capable of everything.
006|001|Praise be to Allah, who created the heavens and the earth, and made darkness and light. Yet those who disbelieve ascribe equals to their Lord.
006|002|It is He who created you from clay, then determined a term—a lifespan known only to Him. Yet, you doubt.
006|003|He is Allah in the heavens and on earth. He knows your private and public affairs, and He knows what you earn.
006|004|No revelation from their Lord ever reaches them without them turning away from it.
006|005|They denied the truth when it came to them, but the news of what they mocked will soon befall them.
006|006|Don’t they see how many generations We destroyed before them? We had established them on earth more firmly than you, and showered them with abundant blessings from the sky, and made rivers flow beneath them. Then, We destroyed them due to their sins and raised new generations after them.
006|007|Even if We had revealed to them a scripture inscribed on paper, and they had touched it with their own hands, those who disbelieve would say, “This is nothing but clear magic”.
006|008|They even ask, “Why has not an angel been sent down to him?” If we had sent down an angel, the matter would’ve been determined, and they would’ve been given no respite.
006|009|And even if We had made him an angel, We would’ve made him in the form of a man, further confusing them.
006|010|Messengers before you were also ridiculed, but those who mocked were surrounded by what they used to ridicule.
006|011|Say, “Travel the earth and observe the fate of the deniers.”
006|012|Say, “To whom belongs all that’s in the heavens and the earth?” Say, “To Allah.” He made mercy incumbent upon Himself. He will gather you on Resurrection Day, which is beyond doubt. Those who lost their souls won’t believe.
006|013|To Him belongs whatever rests in the night and the day. He is the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing.
006|014|Say, “Should I take a protector other than Allah, the Originator of the heavens and the earth, who feeds and is not fed?” Say, “I am instructed to be the first who submits.” And don’t be among the polytheists.
006|015|Say, “I fear the punishment of a tremendous Day if I were to disobey my Lord.”
006|016|Whoever is spared from it on that Day, He will indeed have shown mercy to him; and that’s the clear success.
006|017|If Allah touches you with adversity, no one can remove it but Him. And if He touches you with good, He is capable of everything.
006|018|He is the Dominant over His beings. He is the All-Wise, the Expert.
006|019|Ask them, “What is greater in testimony?” Say, “Allah is the Witness between me and you. This Quran has been revealed to me, to warn you by it and anyone it reaches. Do you bear witness that there are other gods besides Allah?” Say, “I don’t bear witness.” Say, “He is, but One God, and I am innocent of whatever you associate with Him.”
006|020|Those to whom We gave the Scripture recognize it as they recognize their own children. Yet, those who lost their souls don’t believe.
006|021|Who is more unjust than one who fabricates lies about Allah or rejects His revelations? The wrongdoers won’t succeed.
006|022|On the Day We gather them all together, We will ask those who associated partners with Allah, “Where are those partners you claimed?”
006|023|Their only response will be, “By Allah, our Lord, we were not polytheists.”
006|024|See how they lie to themselves, and how the falsehoods they invented have forsaken them.
006|025|Some of them listen to you, but We placed veils over their hearts, preventing them from understanding it, and deafness in their ears. Even if they witnessed every sign, they wouldn’t believe in it. When they come to argue with you, the disbelievers say, “This is nothing but legends of the ancients.”
006|026|They deter others from it and avoid it themselves. They destroy nothing but themselves, yet they don’t perceive it.
006|027|If only you could see, when they’re made to stand before the Fire. They will plead, “If only we could return, not reject our Lord’s revelations, and be among the believers.”
006|028|What they had concealed before will now appear to them; and even if they were sent back, they would certainly return to what they were forbidden, and most surely they are liars.
006|029|They say, “There is nothing beyond our worldly life, and we won’t be resurrected.”
006|030|If only you could see when they are presented before their Lord. He will ask, “Isn’t this the truth?” They will reply, “Yes, by our Lord.” He will say, “Then taste the punishment for your disbelief.”
006|031|Those who deny the meeting with Allah have lost. When the Hour suddenly overtakes them, they will exclaim, “Woe to us for neglecting this!” And they will bear their burdens on their backs—what a terrible load they bear!
006|032|The life of this world is but a game and a diversion. The Home in the Hereafter is far superior for the righteous. Don’t you understand?
006|033|We know that what they say grieves you. It’s not you they reject, but it is Allah’s verses that the wrongdoers deny.
006|034|Messengers before you were also rejected, but they patiently endured rejection and persecution until Our help arrived. And there is no change to the words of Allah. There has already come to you news about the messengers.
006|035|If their denial becomes unbearable for you, then if you can, seek a tunnel through the earth or a ladder into heaven to bring them a sign. If Allah had willed, He could’ve guided them all. So, don’t be of the ignorant.
006|036|Only those who listen will respond. As for the dead, Allah will resurrect them. Then they will be returned to Him.
006|037|They question, “Why has no sign been sent down to him from his Lord?” Say, “Allah has the power to send down a miracle, but most of them don’t know.”
006|038|There is no creature on earth nor bird that flies with its wings, but they are communities like you. We’ve not neglected anything in the Book. Then to their Lord they will be gathered.
006|039|Those who reject Our signs are deaf and mute, in darkness. Whomever Allah wills, He leaves to stray, and whomever He wills, He sets on a straight path.
006|040|Say, “Consider if Allah’s punishment were to befall you, or the Hour were to arrive, would you call upon anyone other than Allah, if you are truthful?”
006|041|Only Him you would call upon, and if He wills, He could remove what you implored Him for, and you would forget what you associated.
006|042|We sent messengers to communities before you, and We seized them with hardship and distress, so they might humble themselves.
006|043|But when Our might came upon them, they didn’t humble themselves. But their hearts became hard, Satan beautified their deeds for them.
006|044|When they dismissed the reminders given to them, We opened for them the gates of everything. But just as they were rejoicing in what they received, We seized them abruptly, and they were left in despair.
006|045|Thus, the wrongdoers were utterly cut off. Praise be to Allah, the Lord of the worlds.
006|046|Ask, “Imagine if Allah were to take away your hearing and sight, and seal upon your hearts; which god, other than Allah, could restore them to you?” See how We lay out the signs in detail, yet they still turn away.
006|047|Ask, “Imagine if Allah’s punishment came upon you suddenly or predictably; would anyone be destroyed except the wrongdoers?”
006|048|We send messengers only to bring good news and to warn. Those who believe and reform will have no fear, nor will they grieve.
006|049|But those who deny Our messages will suffer torment for their defiant disobedience.
006|050|Say, “I don’t claim to hold Allah’s treasures or to know the unseen. I don’t claim to be an angel either. I only follow what’s revealed to me.” Say, “Can the blind and the seeing be equal? Don’t you reflect?”
006|051|Warn with it those who fear being gathered before their Lord—they have no protector or intercessor besides Him—so that they may become righteous.
006|052|Don’t dismiss those who call upon their Lord morning and evening, desiring His countenance. You are not responsible for their judgment, nor are they responsible for yours. If you dismiss them, you will be among the wrongdoers.
006|053|We test some people through others, so they may ask, “Are these the ones Allah favored among us?” Doesn’t Allah know best those who are thankful?
006|054|When those who believe in Our revelations come to you, say, “Peace be upon you. Your Lord has mandated mercy on Himself. If anyone among you commits wrong out of ignorance, and then repents and reforms his ways, then He is Forgiving and Merciful.”
006|055|In this way, We detail the verses, so that the way of the wicked may become fully apparent.
006|056|Say, “I am forbidden to worship those you invoke besides Allah.” Say, “I won’t follow your whims, for then I would stray and not be among the guided ones.”
006|057|Say, “I am reliant on clear evidence from my Lord, yet you deny it. I don’t have what you eagerly demand. Judgment rests solely with Allah. He states the truth, and He is the best of judges.”
006|058|Say, “If I had control over what you eagerly demand, the matter between us would’ve been settled. But Allah knows the wrongdoers best.
006|059|With Him are the keys to the unseen; none knows them but He. He knows everything on land and in the sea. Not a leaf falls without His knowledge, nor is there a grain in the darkness of the earth, or anything fresh or dry, but it is recorded in a clear book.
006|060|It is He who retrieves your souls at night and knows what you’ve accomplished by day. Then He revives you therein to complete a designated term. Then, to Him will be your return, and He will inform you about your deeds.
006|061|He is the Conqueror over His beings, and He dispatches guardians over you, until, when death approaches one of you, Our messengers retrieve their souls, never neglecting in their duty.
006|062|Then, they are returned to Allah, their true Master. His is the judgment, and He is the fastest of accountants.
006|063|Say, “Who rescues you from the darkness of land and sea when you call upon Him, humbly and privately, ‘If He rescues us from this, we will surely be among the thankful?”
006|064|Say, “It is Allah who saves you from it and from every distress, you still associate others with Him.”
006|065|Say, “He is capable of sending a punishment upon you from above or beneath your feet, or dividing you into factions and making you experience each other’s brutality. See how We diversify the verses, so they might understand.”
006|066|Your people have denied it, even though it’s the truth. Say, “I’m not a manager over you.”
006|067|For every prophecy there is a fixed time, and you will soon come to know.
006|068|When you see those who engage in offensive discussions about Our verses, turn away from them until they engage in a different topic. Should Satan cause you to forget, then once you remember, don’t sit in the company of the unjust people.
006|069|The righteous bear no responsibility for them, but a reminder might assist them in becoming conscious.
006|070|Leave those who treat their religion as amusement and distraction, and whom the worldly life has deceived. However, remind with it, lest a soul be ruined by what it earned, it will have no protector or intercessor besides Allah. Even if it should offer every compensation, it won’t be accepted from it. These are the ones who are doomed by their actions. For them is a drink of boiling water and a severe punishment due to their disbelief.
006|071|Say, “Should we call upon, instead of Allah, those who can neither benefit nor harm us, and turn backward after Allah has guided us? Like one whom the devils have led astray on the earth, bewildered in the wilderness, confused, while his friends call him to guidance, saying, ‘Come to us’.” Say, “Allah’s guidance is the guidance, and we’ve been commanded to submit to the Lord of the universes.”
006|072|“And to establish prayer and revere Him. It is to Him that you will be gathered.”
006|073|It is He who created the heavens and the earth with truth. The Day He says, “Be,” it becomes. His word is the ultimate truth. His is the dominion on the Day when the trumpet is blown; the Knower of the unseen and the seen; He is the Wise, the Expert.
006|074|Abraham told his father, Azar, “Do you take idols as gods? I see you and your people are clearly astrayed.”
006|075|We showed Abraham the empire of the heavens and the earth, so that he could have certainty.
006|076|When the night covered him, he saw a star and said, “This is my lord.” But once it set, he said, “I don’t love things that set.”
006|077|When he saw the moon rising, he said, “This is my lord.” But once it set, he said, “Unless my Lord guides me, I would surely be among the misguided.”
006|078|And when he saw the sun rising, he said, “This is my lord; this is greater.” But once it set, he said, “O my people, I am free from what you associate with Him.
006|079|I have turned my face towards the One who originated the heavens and the earth, as a monotheist, and I’m not of the polytheists.”
006|080|His people debated with him, and he said, “Are you arguing with me about Allah after He has guided me? I don’t fear what you associate with Him, unless my Lord should will something. My Lord encompasses all things in knowledge. Won’t you then remember?
006|081|How can I fear what you associate with Him? Instead, you should fear, for you associate with Allah what He never authorized. So which of the two parties has more right to security, if you know?”
006|082|Those who believe and don’t pollute their faith with injustice—these will have security, and they are guided.
006|083|We gave this reasoning to Abraham against his people. We raise in rank whom We will. Your Lord is Wise and Knowing.
006|084|We granted him Isaac and Jacob; each one We guided. We also guided Noah before. And from his offspring, David, Solomon, Job, Joseph, Moses, and Aaron. We thus reward the good-doers.
006|085|Also, Zechariah, John, Jesus, and Elias—all of the virtuous.
006|086|And Ishmael, Elisha, Jonah, and Lot—and each, we preferred over the worlds.
006|087|And among their ancestors, descendants, and brothers—We chose them, and We guided them to a straight path.
006|088|This is Allah’s guidance; with it, He guides whomever He wills among His servants. If they were to associate others with Him, then all their deeds would be nullified.
006|089|These are the ones to whom We gave the Scripture, wisdom, and prophethood. If these people reject it, We’ve already entrusted it to a people who won’t reject it.
006|090|These are the ones whom Allah has guided, so emulate their guidance. Say, “I ask for no compensation for it. This is but a reminder to all mankind.”
006|091|They don’t appraise Allah with true appraisal when they say, “Allah didn’t reveal anything to any human.” Say, “Then, who revealed the Scripture which Moses brought, a light and guidance for humanity? You treat it as mere sheets of paper, showing some and concealing much. You were taught things that neither you nor your ancestors knew before.” Say, “Allah.” Then, leave them playing in their vain discussions.
006|092|We revealed this blessed Scripture, confirming what preceded it, that you may warn the Mother of Cities and those around it. Those who believe in the Hereafter believe in it, and are constant in their prayers.
006|093|Who is more unjust than one who fabricates lies against Allah or says, “A revelation was given to me,” when nothing was revealed to him, or who says, “I can reveal the like of what Allah has revealed?” If only you could see the wrongdoers in the throes of death, with the angels extending their hands, saying, “Yield up your souls! Today, are you being repaid with a punishment of humiliation for the lies you spoke against Allah, and for your being scornful to His signs.”
006|094|“You’ve come to Us alone, as We created you the first time, leaving behind everything We had bestowed upon you. We don’t see your supposed intercessors with you. The links between you and them have been severed, and all you presumed has let you down.”
006|095|Allah is the splitter of the grain and the kernel, bringing out the living from the dead, and the dead from the living. This is Allah. So, how are you deluded?
006|096|He is the One who breaks the dawn, and has made the night for you to rest, and the sun and moon according to calculations. Such is the design of the Almighty, the All-Knowing.
006|097|It is He who set the stars for you, so you may be guided by them in the darknesses of land and sea. We detailed the signs for people who know.
006|098|It is He who initiated you from a single soul, then from a repository, and then from a depository. We detail the signs for people who understand.
006|099|It is He who sends down rain from the sky. With it, We produce diverse kinds of vegetation: lush greenery, from which We produce clustered grain, and date palms with hanging clusters, vineyards, olives, and pomegranates, similar and dissimilar. Observe their fruits as they grow and ripen. In these are signs for people who believe.
006|100|Yet, they attribute partners to Allah—the jinn—even though He created them. They pierce for Him sons and daughters, without any knowledge. Exalted is He, and high above what they attribute to Him.
006|101|The Originator of the heavens and the earth. How could He have a child when He has no female companion? He created all things and is fully aware of everything.
006|102|Such is Allah, your Lord. There is no deity except He, the Creator of all things. Worship Him alone, for He is in charge of all things.
006|103|No vision can grasp Him, yet He grasps all vision. He is the Subtle, the Expert.
006|104|Clear proofs have come to you from your Lord. Whoever sees, does so for his good; and whoever remains blind, does so to his detriment. “I am not a keeper over you.”
006|105|Thus, We vary the verses, so that they may say, “You have studied,” and that We may make clear for a people who know.
006|106|Follow what has been revealed to you from your Lord, for there is no god but Him, and turn away from the associators.
006|107|If Allah had willed, they wouldn’t have associated. We didn’t make you a guardian over them, nor are you a manager over them.
006|108|Don’t insult those they invoke besides Allah, lest they insult Allah out of hostility and ignorance. We made each community’s deeds seem appealing to them. Eventually, they will return to their Lord, who will inform them of everything they did.
006|109|They swear their strongest oaths by Allah that if a miracle came to them, they would believe in it. Say, “The signs are only with Allah.” And how could you tell, when if it did come, they still wouldn’t believe.
006|110|We will turn their hearts and eyes away, just as they refused to believe in it the first time, leaving them wandering aimlessly in their transgression.
006|111|Even if We sent down the angels to them, made the dead speak to them, and gathered all things before them, they would still not believe, unless Allah wills it. But most of them don’t know.
006|112|Similarly, We’ve assigned enemies for every prophet—human and jinn devils—who inspire each other with embellished, deceitful speech. If your Lord had willed, they wouldn’t have done it. So, leave them and their fabrication.
006|113|This allows the hearts of those who don’t believe in the Hereafter to incline towards it, find satisfaction in it, and persist in their sinful pursuits.
006|114|“Should I seek a judge other than Allah, when it is He who revealed the Scripture to you in detail?” Those to whom We gave the Scripture recognize it as the truth from your Lord, so don’t be of those who doubt.
006|115|The Word of your Lord is perfected in its truth and justice. None can alter His words. He is the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing.
006|116|If you were to obey the majority of those on earth, they would lead you astray from Allah’s path. They follow only conjecture, and they are only guessing.
006|117|Your Lord is the most knowledgeable of those who deviate from His path, and He is fully aware of those who are guided.
006|118|Eat of what Allah’s name was pronounced, if you are believers in His revelations.
006|119|Why shouldn’t you not eat that over which Allah’s name was pronounced, when He has already explained to you what He has forbidden to you, except when you are compelled? Many lead astray by their desires, due to their lack of knowledge. Your Lord is fully aware of the transgressors.
006|120|And abandon all sin, whether open or secret. Those who commit sins will be reimbursed for what they’ve done.
006|121|Don’t eat from what Allah’s name hasn’t been mentioned upon, for it’s sinful. The devils inspire their allies to argue with you. If you were to obey them, you would be polytheists.
006|122|Is one who was dead, to whom We gave life and a light by which he can walk among people, be like the one who is in deep darkness, from which he can’t emerge? Thus, the deeds of the unbelievers have been made appealing to them.
006|123|In every community, We’ve placed its most notorious criminals, to conspire within it. However, they only conspire against themselves, without realizing it.
006|124|When a verse comes to them, they say, “We won’t believe unless we receive the same revelations as Allah’s messengers.” Allah knows best where to place His message. Humiliation from Allah and severe punishment will afflict the criminals for their scheming.
006|125|Whomever Allah wills to guide, He expands his heart to submission. And whomever He wills to misguide, He makes his heart tight and constricted, as if he were ascending into the sky. In this way, Allah lays defilement on those who don’t believe.
006|126|This is the path of your Lord, straight. We detailed the signs for those who pay heed.
006|127|For them is the Home of Peace with their Lord, and He is their Protector as a result of their deeds.
006|128|On the Day when He will gather them all: “O assembly of jinn, you’ve exploited many humans.” Their human allies will say, “Our Lord, we’ve benefited from each other, but we’ve now reached the term that You’ve appointed for us.” He will say, “The Fire is your residence, where you will remain forever, except as Allah wills.” Your Lord is Wise and All-Knowing.
006|129|Thus, We let some wrongdoers befriend each other due to what they used to earn.
006|130|“O community of jinn and humans, didn’t there come to you messengers from among you, relating to you My verses and warning you of the meeting of this Day of yours?” They will respond, “We bear witness against ourselves.” The worldly life deceived them, and they will testify against themselves that they were unbelievers.
006|131|That is because your Lord would not unjustly destroy communities while their people are unaware.
006|132|Every soul will be ranked according to its deeds. Your Lord is not unaware of what they do.
006|133|Your Lord is the Self-Sufficient, full of mercy. If He wills, He can remove you and replace you with anyone He wills, just as He raised you from the descendants of another people.
006|134|What you are promised is coming, and you can’t prevent it.
006|135|Say, “O my people, act according to your ability, and so will I. Soon, you will know who will attain the ultimate Home.” The wrongdoers won’t succeed.
006|136|They assign for Allah a portion of the crops and livestock that He originated, saying, “This is for Allah,” so they claim, and “This is for our partners.” But what’s designated for their partners doesn’t reach Allah, while what’s designated for Allah does reach their partners. Bad indeed is their judgment.
006|137|And thus, many of the idolaters have been led by their partners to kill their children, bringing about their ruin and causing confusion in their religion. If Allah had willed, they wouldn’t have done it. So leave them and what they fabricate.
006|138|They also assert, “These livestock and crops are sanctified; none may eat from except those we allow,” so they claim, and certain animals they deem forbidden to ride. And some animals on which they don’t pronounce the name of Allah, inventing falsehood against Him—He will recompense them for what they’ve been inventing.
006|139|They further allege, “What’s in the womb of these animals is exclusively for our males and is forbidden to our wives.” However, if it’s stillborn, they all share in it. He will recompense them for their allegation. He is All-Wise, All-Knowing.
006|140|Those who killed their children have suffered loss, without knowledge, and forbid what Allah provided for them, fabricating lies against Allah. They strayed and weren’t guided.
006|141|It is He who produced gardens, both trellised and untrellised, and date palms, various crops with different flavors, and olives and pomegranates, similar and dissimilar. Eat from their fruit when it ripens, give its due on the day of its harvest, and don’t be wasteful. He doesn’t like the extravagant.
006|142|Livestock serves as a means of transportation and a source of materials. Consume what Allah provided for you, and don’t follow Satan’s footsteps; he is a clear enemy to you.
006|143|Eight pairs: two of sheep and two of goats. Ask, “Did He prohibit the two males, the two females, or what’s carried in the wombs of the two females? Tell me with knowledge, if you are truthful.”
006|144|And of camels and cattle, two pairs. Ask, “Did He forbid the two males, the two females, or what the wombs of the two females contain? Were you present when Allah issued these prohibitions?” So who is more unjust than one who invents a lie against Allah, to lead people astray without knowledge? Allah doesn’t guide the unjust people.
006|145|Say, “In what was revealed to me, I find no food forbidden for consumption, except for carrion, spilled blood, pork—which is unclean—or a sinful offering dedicated to anyone other than Allah. However, if anyone is compelled by necessity, without willful disobedience or transgression, your Lord is Forgiving and Merciful.”
006|146|To those who are Jewish, We prohibited every animal with uncloven hooves; and of the cattle and the sheep We prohibited to them their fat, except what adheres to their backs or the entrails, or what’s mixed with bone. Thus, We penalized them for their rebelliousness. We are truthful.
006|147|If they accuse you of lying, say, “Your Lord is the possessor of vast mercy, but His punishment won’t be averted from guilty people.”
006|148|Those who associate others will say, “If Allah had willed, we wouldn’t have associated anything with Him, nor would our forefathers, nor would we have prohibited anything.” Likewise, those who came before them also denied until they tasted Our punishment. Say, “Do you have any knowledge you can present to us? You are just following speculation, and you do nothing but lie.”
006|149|Say, ”With Allah lies the decisive argument. Had He willed, He would have guided you all.”
006|150|Say, “Bring forth your witnesses who can testify that Allah has forbidden this.” If they do testify, don’t testify with them. And don’t follow the inclinations of those who deny Our signs, those who don’t believe in the Hereafter, those who equate others with their Lord.
006|151|Say, “Come, I will recite what your Lord prohibited for you: don’t associate anything with Him; honor your parents; don’t kill your children from fear of poverty—We provide for you and them; don’t approach immoralities, whether open or secret; and don’t take a life that Allah deemed sacred, except in the course of justice. These are His commandments to you, so you may know.”
006|152|And don’t come near the wealth of the orphan, except in the best manner, until he reaches maturity. Give full measure and weight in justice. We never burden a soul beyond its capacity. And when you speak, be just, even if it concerns a close relative. And fulfill your covenant with Allah. This, He has commanded you, so you may avoid wrongdoing.
006|153|This is My path, straight, so follow it. Don’t follow other paths, for they will lead you astray from His path. Allah has commanded this to you, so you may refrain from wrongdoing.
006|154|We gave Moses the Scripture, complete for those who do good, explaining all things, as guidance and mercy, so they may believe in the encounter with their Lord.
006|155|And this is a blessed Scripture that We revealed. Follow it and be righteous, so you may receive mercy.
006|156|Lest you say, “The Scripture was revealed to two communities before us, and we were unaware of their teachings.”
006|157|Or perhaps you might say, “Had the Scripture been revealed to us, we would’ve been more rightly guided than they.” Now, clear evidence, guidance, and mercy have come to you from your Lord. Who is more unjust than one who denies Allah’s messages and turns away from them? We will repay those who turn away from Our revelations with the severest punishment, because of their turning away.
006|158|Are they awaiting the descent of the angels, the arrival of your Lord Himself, or the manifestation of some of your Lord’s signs? On the day when some of these signs from your Lord do appear, faith won’t benefit any soul which didn’t believe before, or which didn’t earn any good by its faith. Say, “Wait; we, too, are waiting.”
006|159|As for those who divided their religion and became denominations, you have no association with them. Their case rests with Allah, and He will then inform them about their deeds.
006|160|Whoever presents a good deed will receive a tenfold equivalent. But whoever commits evil acts will only be repaid equivalently and won’t be wronged.
006|161|Say, “My Lord has guided me to a straight path, an upright religion, the community of Abraham the Monotheist, who wasn’t among the polytheists.”
006|162|Say, “My prayers, my devotion, my living, and my dying are all for Allah, the Lord of the worlds.
006|163|There is no partner for Him. To this I have been commanded, and I am the first of the Submitters.”
006|164|Say, “Should I seek a lord other than Allah, when He is the Lord of all things?” No soul earns except against itself, and no bearer of burdens will bear the burdens of another. Then to your Lord is your return, and He will inform you about your disagreements.
006|165|It is He who made you successors on earth and elevated some of you above others in ranks—to test you through what He gave you. Your Lord is swift in retribution, and He is Forgiving and Merciful.
007|001|Alif. Lam. Meem. Saad.
007|002|A Scripture was revealed to you, so let there be no anxiety in your heart because of it. Use it to warn, and as a reminder for the believers.
007|003|Follow what was revealed to you from your Lord, and don’t follow other masters beside Him. Yet, little do you remember.
007|004|How many a town have We destroyed! Our might came upon them by night or while they were taking a midday nap.
007|005|When Our wrath befell them, their only plea was, “Indeed, we were wrongdoers.”
007|006|We will question those to whom the messengers were sent, and We will question the messengers themselves.
007|007|We will narrate their stories to them with knowledge, for We were not absent.
007|008|On that Day, the weighing is the truth. Those whose scales are heavy will find success.
007|009|However, those with light scales will have lost their souls, for they had denied Our signs.
007|010|We established you on earth and provided for your sustenance and growth. Yet, seldom do you give thanks.
007|011|We created you, then We fashioned you, then We said to the angels, “Prostrate yourselves before Adam.” They all prostrated, except Iblis, he was not of those who prostrated.
007|012|He asked, “What prevented you from prostrating when I commanded you?” He replied, “I am superior to him; You created me from fire, but You created him from mud.”
007|013|He said, “Descend from this place; it’s not for you to be arrogant here! Get out, for you are disgraced!”
007|014|He pleaded, “Delay me until the Day they are resurrected.”
007|015|He replied, “You are granted a delay.”
007|016|He said, “Since You caused me to stray, I will sit in wait for them on Your straight path.
007|017|Then, I will come at them from before them and from behind them, from their right and their left. And You won’t find most of them as thankful.”
007|018|He said, “Get out of it, despised and defeated. Whoever among them follows you—I will fill up Hell with you all.
007|019|And you, Adam, reside with your wife in Paradise, and eat freely from wherever you wish; but don’t approach that tree, lest you become of the wrongdoers.”
007|020|Then Satan whispered to them, revealing their hidden nudity. He said, “Your Lord only forbade you this tree to prevent you from becoming angels or achieving immortality.”
007|021|And he swore to them, “I am truly a sincere advisor to you.”
007|022|Thus, he cunningly deceived them. And when they tasted the fruit of the tree, their nudity was exposed to them, and they started covering themselves with leaves from the Garden. Then their Lord called out to them, “Didn’t I prohibit you from that tree and warn you that Satan is your avowed enemy?”
007|023|They responded, “Our Lord, we have wronged ourselves. If You don’t forgive us and have mercy on us, we will be among the losers.”
007|024|He said, “Descend, with enmity among some of you. For you will have on the earth a settlement and enjoyment until a time.”
007|025|He added, “There, you will live; there, you will die, and from there, you will be resurrected.”
007|026|O Children of Adam, We provided you with clothing to cover your bodies and for fineries. But the clothing of piety—that is the best. These are among Allah’s verses, so they may take heed.
007|027|O Children of Adam, let not Satan tempt you, as he expelled your parents from Paradise, stripping them of their clothing to show them their nudity. He and his type see you from where you don’t see them. We made the devils allies to those who don’t believe.
007|028|When they commit an immoral act, they say, “We found our ancestors doing it, and Allah commanded us to do it.” Say, “Allah never commands immorality. Do you say about Allah what you don’t know?”
007|029|Say, “My Lord commands justice. Set your faces towards every place of worship, and pray to Him, devoting your faith to Him alone. Just as He originated you, so will you return.”
007|030|Some He has guided, and some deserved to lose their way. They’ve taken the devils as allies instead of Allah, thinking they are guided.
007|031|O Children of Adam, take your adornment at every place of prayer. Eat and drink, but don’t commit excesses, for He doesn’t like the extravagant.
007|032|Say, “Who prohibited the beautiful things that Allah produced for His beings, and the wholesome sustenance?” Say, “They are for those who believe during their life in this world, exclusively for them on Resurrection Day.” Thus, We detail the verses for people who know.
007|033|Say, “My Lord forbids shameless acts, whether open or hidden, and sin, and oppression, and associating anything with Allah without His permission, and speaking about Allah without knowledge.”
007|034|Every nation has an appointed time. When their appointed time comes, they won’t be able to delay it by a single hour. nor will they be able to advance it.
007|035|O Children of Adam, when messengers come to you from among you, conveying My messages to you, those who adhere to righteousness and reform will have no fear, nor will they grieve.
007|036|But those who deny Our verses and treat them with arrogance are the residents of the Fire, where they will dwell forever.
007|037|Who is more unjust than one who fabricates lies against Allah or denies His verses? These must have their share as decreed. Until Our messengers come to take their souls, they will ask, “Where are those you used to invoke besides Allah?” They will respond, “They have forsaken us.” And they will testify against themselves that they were unbelievers.
007|038|He will say, “Enter among the communities of jinn and humans that have gone before you into the Fire.” Every time a community enters, it will curse its predecessor. Until, when they have all arrived therein, the last of them will say about the first, “Our Lord, these misled us, so give them a double punishment in the Fire.” He will say, “Each will receive a double, but you don’t know.”
007|039|The first of them will say to the last, “You have no advantage over us, so taste the punishment for what you used to earn.”
007|040|Those who denied our verses and were arrogant towards them—for them, the gates of Heaven won’t open, nor will they enter Paradise, until a camel can pass through the eye of a needle. Thus do We recompense the wrongdoers.
007|041|For them will be beds in Hell, and from over them will be coverings. Thus do We recompense the wrongdoers.
007|042|As for those who believe and live righteously—We don’t burden any soul beyond its scope—these are the inhabitants of Paradise, where they will reside forever.
007|043|We will remove any ill feeling from their hearts, beneath them rivers will flow, and they will exclaim, “Praise be to Allah, who guided us to this. Had Allah not guided us, we wouldn’t have been guided. The messengers of our Lord truly brought the truth.” And they will be called, “This is the Paradise which you are made to inherit because of what you used to do.”
007|044|The inhabitants of Paradise will call out to the inhabitants of the Fire, “We found what our Lord promised us to be true; did you find your Lord’s promise to be true?” They will answer, “Yes.” An announcer between them will proclaim, “The curse of Allah is upon the wrongdoers.
007|045|Those who obstructed Allah’s path, sought to make it crooked, and denied the Hereafter.”
007|046|Between them is a partition, and on the Heights are men who recognize everyone by their marks. They will call out to the residents of Paradise, “Peace be upon you.” They haven’t yet entered it, but they hope to.
007|047|And when their gaze is directed towards the dwellers of the Fire, they will say, “Our Lord, don’t place us with the wrongdoers.”
007|048|The people on the Heights will call out to men they recognize by their features, saying, “Your hoardings availed you nothing, nor did your arrogance.
007|049|Are these the ones you swore Allah would never touch with mercy?” “Enter Paradise; there is no fear for you, nor will you grieve.”
007|050|The dwellers of the Fire will plead with the dwellers of Paradise, “Pour some water over us, or with some of what Allah has provided you with.” They will reply, “Allah prohibited them to the unbelievers.”
007|051|Those who treated their religion as a pastime and amusement, and whom the worldly life deceived. Today, We will neglect them, as they neglected the meeting of this Day and denied Our signs.
007|052|We provided them with a Scripture which We detailed with knowledge, a guide and mercy for those who believe.
007|053|Are they merely waiting for its interpretation? The day its interpretation comes, those who had previously ignored it will say, “Indeed, the messengers of our Lord came with the truth. Do we have any intercessors who will intercede for us now? Or could we be sent back to behave differently?” They have lost their souls, and what they used to invent has failed them.
007|054|Your Lord is Allah, who created the heavens and the earth in six periods, then He positioned Himself on the throne. He makes the night cover the day, which is in rapid pursuit of it. He made the sun, the moon, and the stars subservient; all are obedient to His command. Blessed is Allah, the Lord of all realms.
007|055|Call upon your Lord humbly and privately. He doesn’t love the transgressors.
007|056|Don’t cause corruption on earth after its reformation. And call upon Him in fear and aspiration. The mercy of Allah is close to those who do good.
007|057|It is He who sends the winds, heralding His mercy. When they carry heavy clouds, We drive them to a lifeless land, and then We release the rain, producing all kinds of fruits. Thus We will bring out the dead; perhaps you will reflect.
007|058|Fertile land yields its produce by its Lord’s permission, while infertile land produces but little. Thus, We diversify the signs for those who are grateful.
007|059|We sent Noah to his people, and he said, “O my people, worship Allah. You have no deity other than Him. I fear for you the punishment of a great day.”
007|060|The chiefs of his people said, “We see you in manifest error.”
007|061|He said, “O my people, there is no error in me. Rather, I am a messenger from the Lord of the worlds.
007|062|I convey to you my Lord’s messages, I offer you sincere advice, and I know from Allah what you don’t know.”
007|063|“Are you astonished that a reminder from your Lord has come to you through one of your own, to warn you and that you may guard yourselves, so that you may receive mercy?”
007|064|But they rejected him, so We saved him and those with him in the Ark, and We drowned those who denied Our revelations. They were blind people.
007|065|To Aad, their brother Hud. He said, “O my people, worship Allah; You have no other god besides Him. Won’t you then be righteous?”
007|066|The disbelieving leaders of his people responded, “We see you as foolish, and we think you’re a liar.”
007|067|He replied, “O my people, I am not foolish; I am a messenger from the Lord of the worlds.
007|068|“I convey to you the messages of my Lord, and I am a reliable counselor for you.”
007|069|“Do you find it strange that a message from your Lord has come to you through a man from amongst you, to warn you? Remember, He made you successors after Noah’s people and increased your stature. Remember Allah’s blessings, so you may thrive.”
007|070|They replied, “Did you come to us to make us worship Allah alone and give up what our fathers worshiped? If you are truthful, bring us what you threaten us with.”
007|071|He replied, “Condemnation and wrath from your Lord have befallen you. Are you arguing with me over names you and your ancestors invented that Allah didn’t authorize? So wait, and I will wait with you.”
007|072|We saved him and those with him by a mercy from Us, and We obliterated those who denied Our signs and were not believers.
007|073|To Thamud, their brother Saleh. He pleaded, “O my people, worship Allah; You have no other god besides Him. A clear sign has come to you from your Lord: this she-camel of Allah is a sign for you. Let her graze on Allah’s earth, and don’t harm her, lest a severe punishment befalls you.”
007|074|“Remember, He made you successors after Aad, and He established you in the land. You construct palaces on its plains and carve out homes in the mountains. Remember Allah’s blessings, and don’t cause corruption in the land.”
007|075|The arrogant leaders among his people said to those oppressed who believed, “Do you believe that Saleh is sent by his Lord?” They replied, “Yes, we believe in the message he brought.”
007|076|The arrogant ones replied, “We reject what you’ve believed in.”
007|077|So, they hamstrung the she-camel, brazenly defying their Lord’s command, and said, “O Saleh, bring upon us what you threaten us with, if you are one of the messengers.”
007|078|So the earthquake seized them, leaving them lifeless in their homes.
007|079|So he turned away from them, saying, “O my people, I have delivered my Lord’s message to you, and I advised you sincerely, but you don’t appreciate advisers.”
007|080|And Lot told his people, “You commit an immorality no one in the world has ever perpetrated before.”
007|081|“You lust after men instead of women. Indeed, you are a people of excess.”
007|082|His people responded, “Expel them from your village; they are purist people.”
007|083|So, We saved him and his family, except for his wife; she was one of those who lingered behind.
007|084|And We rained upon them a downpour. Consider the fate of those who committed wrongdoings.
007|085|To Midian, their brother Shuaib. He said, “O my people, worship Allah; you have no other god but Him. Clear proof has come to you from your Lord. Maintain just measures and weights, do not devalue people’s goods, and don’t spread corruption on earth after it was set right. This is better for you, if only you are believers.”
007|086|“Don’t sit on every trail, intimidating and hindering from the path of Allah those who believe in Him, seeking to make it crooked. Remember when you were few, and He multiplied you. And consider the fate of the wrongdoers.”
007|087|“Given that some of you have believed in what I was sent with, and some haven’t, be patient until Allah renders His judgment between us. He is the best of judges.”
007|088|The arrogant leaders from his community declared, “O Shuaib, we will expel you and those who believed with you from our town, unless you return to our religion.” He responded, “Even against our will?”
007|089|“We would be fabricating a lie against Allah if we returned to your religion after Allah has rescued us from it. It’s not for us to return to it unless Allah, our Lord, permits. Our Lord encompasses everything in His knowledge. In Allah, we’ve placed our trust. Our Lord, decide between us and our people in truth, for You are the best decision maker.”
007|090|The disbelieving elites among his people said, “If you follow Shuaib, you will surely be among the losers.”
007|091|A tremor overtook them, and they lay lifeless in their homes.
007|092|Those who denied Shuai—it is as though they had never thrived there. Those who denied Shuaib—they were the losers.
007|093|Then he turned away from them and said, “O my people, I have conveyed to you my Lord’s messages, and I have advised you. So, How could I grieve for a people who reject faith?”
007|094|Whenever We sent a prophet to a city, We tested its people with adversity and hardship so that they might turn in humility.
007|095|Then, We replaced their hardship with ease until they multiplied and said, “Our ancestors, too, experienced hardship and ease.” Suddenly, We seized them unawares.
007|096|Had the residents of the towns believed and been righteous, We would’ve opened upon them blessings from the sky and the earth. But they denied the truth, so We seized them on account of their misdeeds.
007|097|Are the people of the towns feeling secure from Our punishment coming upon them suddenly at night while they sleep?
007|098|Are the townsfolk carefree that Our punishment won’t come to them in the daytime while they play?
007|099|Do they feel safe from Allah’s scheme? None feel secure from Allah’s scheme except the losers.
007|100|Doesn’t it guide those who inherit the earth after its inhabitants, that if We wish, We could afflict them because of their sins and seal their hearts, so they would not hear?
007|101|These are the towns; We tell you their stories. Their messengers came to them with evident signs, but they would not believe in what they had already rejected. Thus, Allah seals the hearts of the unbelievers.
007|102|We found most of them not true to their commitments; We found most of them sinful.
007|103|Then, after them, We sent Moses with Our signs to Pharaoh and his establishment, but they were unjust toward them. See, then, how was the end of the corrupters.
007|104|Moses said, “O Pharaoh, I am a messenger from the Lord of the worlds.”
007|105|“Rightly so, I can’t say anything other than the truth about Allah. I’ve come to you with clear proof from your Lord, so release the Children of Israel with me.”
007|106|He responded, “If you have a miracle, then present it, if you are truthful.”
007|107|So, he threw down his staff, and behold, it turned into a conspicuous serpent.
007|108|And he exposed his hand, and suddenly, it was white for all to see.
007|109|Pharaoh’s council exclaimed, “This man is a skilled magician!”
007|110|“He intends to expel you from your land; what, then, do you command?”
007|111|They proposed, “Put off him and his brother for some time, and send envoys to the cities.”
007|112|“To gather and bring to you every accomplished magician.”
007|113|So, the magicians arrived at Pharaoh’s presence, and they inquired, “Will we be rewarded if we triumph?”
007|114|He answered, “Yes, and you will be among the ones closest to me.”
007|115|They asked, “O Moses, should you throw first, or should we?”
007|116|He replied, “You throw.” And when they performed their enchantment, they cast a spell upon the people’s eyes, struck fear in their hearts, and exhibited a magnificent spectacle of sorcery.
007|117|Then, We revealed to Moses, “Throw down your staff.” And suddenly, it swallowed the illusions they had fabricated.
007|118|So, the truth was established, and what they were doing became null.
007|119|They were defeated there and then, and were utterly humiliated.
007|120|The magicians fell prostrate.
007|121|They proclaimed, “We have believed in the Lord of the worlds.
007|122|The Lord of Moses and Aaron.”
007|123|Pharaoh said, “You dare to believe in him before I give you permission? You hatched this plot in the city to expel its inhabitants. But you will soon know.”
007|124|“I will sever your hands and feet on opposite sides; then I will crucify you all.”
007|125|They responded, “Indeed, to our Lord we will return.”
007|126|“You are penalizing us merely because we believed in our Lord’s signs when they came to us.” “Our Lord, pour upon us patience and receive our souls in submission.”
007|127|The elite among Pharaoh’s people questioned, “Will you let Moses and his people cause disorder in the land and forsake you and your gods?” He replied, “We will kill their sons and spare their women; we have absolute power over them.”
007|128|Moses said to his people, “Seek help from Allah and be patient. The earth belongs to Allah; He grants it to whomever He wills among His servants. And the end is for the righteous.”
007|129|They replied, “We were oppressed before you came to us and after you arrived.” He replied, “Perhaps your Lord will destroy your enemy and make you inherit the land, then He will observe how you conduct yourselves.”
007|130|We afflicted Pharaoh’s people with drought and crop failure so they might take heed.
007|131|Whenever good fortune came their way, they would say, “This is our due.” But when adversity struck them, they attributed it to an ill omen of Moses and those with him. Surely, their misfortune was ordained by Allah, but most of them know not.
007|132|They said, “Whatever sign you bring to fascinate us, we won’t believe in you.”
007|133|So, We unleashed upon them the flood, locusts, lice, frogs, and blood—all detailed signs. Yet they persisted in arrogance; they were a sinful people.
007|134|Whenever a calamity struck them, they would plead, “O Moses, pray to your Lord for us, under His promise to you. If you lift this affliction from us, we will believe in you and let the Children of Israel go with you.”
007|135|Yet when We removed from them the plague until a term which they should reach, they broke their promise.
007|136|As a result, We exacted retribution from them and drowned them in the sea, for they denied Our signs and paid them no heed.
007|137|We granted the oppressed the inheritance of the Eastern and Western parts of land We had blessed. Thus, the benevolent promise of your Lord to the Children of Israel was fulfilled, in recognition of their patience. And we destroyed what Pharaoh and his people were constructing and what they were establishing.
007|138|We led the Children of Israel across the sea. Upon encountering a people kneeling before their idols, they said, “O Moses, make a god for us, as they have gods.” He responded, “You are truly an ignorant people.”
007|139|“These people are doomed for their destruction, and what they do is futile.”
007|140|He said, “Would I seek for you a god other than Allah, while He has preferred you over the worlds?”
007|141|And remember when We rescued you from Pharaoh’s people, who subjected you to the harshest torment, killing your sons and sparing your women. That was a severe trial from your Lord.
007|142|We set a meeting with Moses for thirty nights, which We completed with another ten; so the term of his Lord was completed in forty nights. Moses instructed his brother Aaron, “Take my place among my people, act rightly, and don’t follow the way of the mischief-makers.”
007|143|When Moses arrived for Our appointment, and his Lord spoke to him, he pleaded, “My Lord, allow me to see You.” He replied, “You won’t see Me, but look at the mountain; if it remains in its place, you’ll see Me.” When his Lord revealed His glory to the mountain, He made it crumble to dust, and Moses fell down fainting. Upon regaining consciousness, he exclaimed, “Glory be to You, I turn to You in repentance, I am the first of the believers.”
007|144|He said, “O Moses, I have chosen you over people by My Messages and My speech. Therefore, take what I’ve given you, and be among the grateful.”
007|145|We inscribed for him on the Tablets comprehensive instructions and detailed explanation for everything. “Adhere to them, and instruct your people to uphold the best of them. I will show you the dwelling of the wicked.”
007|146|I will divert from My signs those who behave arrogantly without right on Earth. Even if they witness every sign, they won’t believe in it. If they see the path of righteousness, they won’t adopt it. But if they see the path of error, they will embrace it. This is because they denied Our signs and remained heedless of them.
007|147|Those who deny Our revelations and the meeting in the Hereafter—their deeds will come to nothing. Won’t they be repaid for what they’ve done?
007|148|In Moses’ absence, his people fabricated a calf from their jewelry—a body that emitted a mooing sound. Couldn’t they see that it could neither speak to them nor guide them on a path? They took it as an object of worship and were in the wrong.
007|149|And when regret overcame them and saw that they were astray, they lamented, “Unless our Lord bestows His mercy upon us and forgives us, we will surely be among the losers.”
007|150|When Moses returned to his people, angered and grieved, he exclaimed, “What a terrible thing you did in my absence! Were you so eager to defy your Lord’s commands?” He threw down the Tablets and seized his brother by the head, dragging him towards himself. He said, “Son of my mother, the people took advantage of my weaknesses and almost killed me. Don’t let the enemies gloat over me, and don’t count me among the wrongdoing people.”
007|151|He prayed, “My Lord, forgive me and my brother, and in Your mercy, admit me and my brother, for You are the most merciful of the merciful.”
007|152|Those who idolized the calf incurred wrath from their Lord, and humiliation in this life. Thus do We recompense the inventors of lies.
007|153|But those who commit misdeeds and then repent and believe—Surely your Lord, after this, is Forgiving, Merciful.
007|154|When Moses’ anger had subsided, he picked up the Tablets; within their engraving was guidance and mercy for those who fear their Lord.
007|155|Moses selected seventy men from his people for Our appointed meeting. When the tremor seized them, he said, “My Lord, if You had willed, You could’ve destroyed them—and me—before. Will You destroy us for the deeds of the foolish among us? This is but Your test, by which You lead astray whom You will and guide whom You will. You are our Protector, so forgive us and have mercy on us. You are the Best of those who forgive.
007|156|Therefore, prescribe for us good in this world and in the Hereafter. We have turned to You.” He replied, “My punishment—I afflict with it whom I wish, but My mercy encompasses all things. I will specify it for those who conduct themselves righteously, give charity, and believe in Our revelations.”
007|157|Those who follow the Messenger, the illiterate prophet, whom they find referenced in their own Torah and Gospel—he guides them towards righteousness, forbids them from evil, permits for them all good things, forbids them from all impure things, and removes from them their burdens and the shackles that had bound them. Those who believe in him, honor him, assist him, and follow the light that was sent down with him—these are the ones who will succeed.
007|158|Say, “O people, I am Allah’s Messenger to you all—to whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth. There is no deity except Him; He gives life and causes death.” So, believe in Allah and His Messenger, the Gentile Prophet, who believes in Allah and His words. Follow him, so that you may be guided.
007|159|Among the people of Moses, a community exists that guides with truth and by which they establish justice.
007|160|We divided them into twelve tribes, distinct nations. When his people asked Moses for water, We instructed, “Strike the rock with your staff.” From it, twelve springs gushed forth; each tribe recognized its designated drinking place. We shaded them with clouds and sent down upon them manna and quails: “Eat from the good things We provided you.” They didn’t wrong Us, but they wronged themselves.
007|161|They were instructed, “Settle in this town, eat from it wherever you wish, say, ‘Relinquish,’ and enter the gate humbly; We will forgive your sins and enhance the reward for the doers of good.”
007|162|But the wrongdoers among them changed the words they were given to something different, so We sent down upon them a punishment from the sky due to their wrongdoing.
007|163|Ask them about the town by the sea, where they violated the Sabbath. Fish would surface in abundance on their Sabbath days, but not on the days they didn’t observe the Sabbath. We tested them in this manner due to their defiance.
007|164|Some of them questioned, “Why do you preach to people whom Allah is about to destroy or punish severely?” They replied, “To have an excuse before your Lord, and perhaps they may become righteous.”
007|165|So, when they forgot what they had been reminded of, We saved those who prohibited wrong, and We seized those who did wrong with a severe punishment because they were transgressors.
007|166|And when they continued disregarding the reminders, We said to them, “Be despicable apes.”
007|167|Your Lord declared that He would send against them, until the Day of Resurrection, those who will inflict terrible suffering on them. Your Lord is swift in penalty; but He is also Forgiving, Most Merciful.
007|168|We dispersed them into communities throughout the earth. Some of them are righteous, while some are less so. We tested them with both good and bad circumstances, so they might return.
007|169|After them, succeeded generations who inherited the Scripture, they chose the fleeting pleasures of this world, saying, “We will be forgiven.” And if similar pleasures came their way, they would again seize them. Weren’t they bound by a covenant to uphold the Scripture and to speak nothing but the truth about Allah? Didn’t they study what was in it? The home of the Hereafter is better for the righteous. Don’t you understand?
007|170|Those who adhere to the Scripture and perform prayers—We won’t let the reward of the reformers be lost.
007|171|We held the mountain over them like a canopy, and they feared it would fall upon them. “Hold firmly to what We’ve given you, and remember what’s in it, so you may be protected.”
007|172|And when your Lord took out from the children of Adam—from their loins—their descendants and made them testify of themselves: “Am I not your Lord?” They responded, “Yes, we testify.” Lest you should say on the Resurrection Day, “We were unaware of this.”
007|173|Or lest you say, “It was only that our ancestors associated before, and we were but descendants after them. Will You destroy us because of the deeds of the fabricators?”
007|174|Thus, We detail the verses, so they may return.
007|175|Tell them the story of the one to whom We presented Our signs, but he shrugged them off; thus, Satan followed him, and he became one of the deviants.
007|176|Had We willed, We could’ve raised him by their means, but he clung to the earth and pursued his desires. His example is that of a dog: if you chase him, he pants, or if you leave him, he still pants. That’s the likeness of the people who deny Our verses. So, tell the stories so they may reflect.
007|177|How terrible is the example of the people who deny Our revelations and wrong themselves!
007|178|Whomever Allah guides—he is the guided; and whomever He sends astray—those are the ones who are the losers.
007|179|We’ve destined for Hell many jinns and humans. They have hearts with which they don’t understand, eyes with which they don’t see, and ears with which they don’t hear. They are like cattle; rather, they are more astray. These are the heedless ones.
007|180|To Allah belong the most beautiful names; so call upon Him by them, and avoid those who disrespect His names. They will be recompensed for their deeds.
007|181|Among those We’ve created is a community who guide by truth and by it establish justice.
007|182|Those who reject Our communications—We will lead them gradually from where they don’t know.
007|183|I will give them time. My plan is firm.
007|184|Or don’t they think? There is no madness in their friend. He is but a transparent warner.
007|185|Didn’t they contemplate the dominion of the heavens and the earth, and what Allah created, and that their term might be near? In what statement after this will they believe?
007|186|Whomever Allah misguides—there is no guide for him. And He leaves them in their transgression, wandering blindly.
007|187|They ask you about the Hour, “When will it arrive?” Respond, “The knowledge of it lies only with my Lord. Only He will reveal it when its time comes. It hangs heavily in the heavens and the earth, and it will come upon you only unexpectedly.” They ask you as if you are privy to it. Say, “Only Allah possesses knowledge of it, yet most people are unaware.”
007|188|Say, “I have no power to benefit or harm myself, except as Allah wills. If I knew the unseen, I would’ve acquired much good, and no harm would’ve touched me. I am only a warner and a bearer of good news to those who believe.”
007|189|It is He who created you from a single person, and made its spouse from it, so he might find comfort in her. When he mates with her, she carries a light burden that she can hardly feel. When it becomes heavy, they pray to Allah, their Lord, “If You grant us a healthy child, we will surely be among the grateful.”
007|190|Yet, when He grants them a healthy child, they associate partners to Him in what He gave them. Exalted is Allah, far above the partners they associate with Him.
007|191|Do they ascribe to Him partners who create nothing, yet are themselves created?
007|192|They can’t help them, nor can they help themselves.
007|193|And if you invite them for guidance, they won’t follow you. It is the same whether you call them or you remain silent.
007|194|Those whom you call upon besides Allah are servants like you. So call upon them, and let them respond to you, if you are truthful.
007|195|Do they have legs with which they walk? Or hands with which they strike? Or eyes with which they see? Or ears with which they hear? Say, “Call upon your ‘associates’, then scheme against me, and give me no respite.”
007|196|“My protector is Allah, who revealed the Book, and He protects the righteous.”
007|197|Those you call upon besides Him can’t help you, nor can they help themselves.
007|198|And if you invite them for guidance, they can’t hear. You may see them looking towards you, but they don’t see.
007|199|Accept forgiveness, commend what’s right, and turn away from the ignorant.
007|200|If an evil suggestion from Satan should assault you, seek refuge in Allah. He is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.
007|201|Those who are righteous, when an impulse from Satan strikes them, they remind themselves, and immediately see clearly.
007|202|And their brethren prolong them in error, and then cease not.
007|203|When you don’t bring them a verse, they say, “Why can’t you make one up?” Say, “I only follow what’s revealed to me by my Lord. These are insights from your Lord, and guidance and mercy for people who believe.”
007|204|When the Quran is read, then listen to it attentively, so you may receive mercy.
007|205|And remember your Lord within yourself, with humility and reverence, and without raising your voice, in the morning and the evening, and don’t be among the unmindful.
007|206|Those who are in your Lord’s presence aren’t too proud to worship Him. They glorify Him, and to Him they prostrate.
008|001|They ask you about the spoils. Say, “The spoils belong to Allah and the Messenger.” So fear Allah, settle your disputes, and obey Allah and His Messenger, if you are believers.
008|002|The believers are those whose hearts tremble when Allah is mentioned, whose faith is strengthened when His verses are recited to them, and who trust their Lord.
008|003|Those who perform the prayers and spend from what We provide for them.
008|004|These are the true believers. They have elevated ranks with their Lord, forgiveness, and a generous provision.
008|005|Just as your Lord brought you out of your home truthfully, despite the reluctance of some believers.
008|006|They argued with you about the truth after it had become clear, as if they were driven towards death while they looked on.
008|007|Allah promised you that one of the two parties would be yours, but you wished the unarmed one would be yours. However, Allah wanted to establish the truth by His words, and to root out the unbelievers.
008|008|To confirm the truth and to nullify falsehood, even if the guilty hate it.
008|009|Recall when you implored your Lord for help, He responded, “I am sending you a thousand angels in ranks.”
008|010|Allah made this but good news, and an assurance to your hearts. Victory comes only from Allah. Allah is Mighty and Wise.
008|011|He caused drowsiness to overcome you, granting you tranquility from Himself. He sent down rain from the sky to purify you, to rid you of Satan’s pollution, to strengthen your hearts, and to steady your steps.
008|012|Your Lord inspired the angels: “I am with you, so firm up those who believe. I will instill terror into the hearts of those who disbelieve. Strike at the necks, and strike off every fingertip of theirs.”
008|013|This is because they defied Allah and His Messenger. Whoever defies Allah and His Messenger—surely, Allah is severe in retribution.
008|014|“This is yours, so taste it.” And for the unbelievers is the punishment of the Fire.
008|015|O you who believe, when you confront the unbelievers on the march, never turn your backs to them.
008|016|On that day, whoever turns their back to them—unless maneuvering for battle or intending to join another group—has incurred wrath from Allah, and his abode is Hell, a most terrible destination.
008|017|You didn’t kill them, but it was Allah who killed them. And you threw not when you threw, but it was Allah who threw—to test the believers with a good test from Him. Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.
008|018|Thus, Allah thwarts the schemes of the unbelievers.
008|019|If you seek victory, victory has indeed come to you. If you cease, it’s better for you, but if you return, We too will return. Your forces won’t avail you at all, even if they are numerous. Allah is with the believers.
008|020|O you who believe, obey Allah and His Messenger, and don’t turn away from him while you listen.
008|021|And don’t be like those who say, “We hear,” but they listen not.
008|022|The worst of creatures in the sight of Allah are the deaf and dumb who don’t understand.
008|023|If Allah had found any goodness in them, He would’ve made them hear. Yet, even if He had, they would still have turned away in defiance.
008|024|O you who believe, respond to Allah and the Messenger when he calls you to what gives you life. And know that Allah intervenes between a person and his heart, and that to Him you will be gathered.
008|025|And fear a trial that doesn’t exclusively affect the wrongdoers among you, and know that Allah’s retribution is severe.
008|026|And remember when you were few, weak in the land, fearing that people might abduct you. Then he sheltered you, strengthened you with His victory, and supplied you with good things, so you could express gratitude.
008|027|O you who believe, don’t betray Allah and the Messenger, nor betray your trusts while you know.
008|028|Know that your possessions and your children are a test, and that with Allah, there is a great reward.
008|029|O you who believe, if you fear Allah, He will grant you discernment, purify you of your sins, and forgive you. Allah is of abundant bounty.
008|030|Remember when those who disbelieve planned against you, to capture, to kill, or to expel you. They planned, and Allah planned; but Allah is the best of planners.
008|031|When Our revelations are recited to them, they say, “We’ve heard. If we wanted, we could say the same; these are nothing but myths of the ancients.”
008|032|They also say, “O Allah, if this is the truth from You, then rain down stones from the sky upon us, or inflict upon us a harsh punishment.”
008|033|Allah would not punish them while you are among them, nor would Allah punish them while they are seeking forgiveness.
008|034|Why should Allah not punish them, when they block access to the Sacred Mosque, even though they weren’t its rightful guardians? Its true guardians are the pious, but most don’t know.
008|035|Their prayers at the House are nothing more than whistling and clapping. So, taste the punishment for having disbelieved.
008|036|Those who disbelieve squander their wealth to deter people from Allah’s path. They will continue to spend it, then it will become a source of regret for them. Eventually, they will be defeated, and the unbelievers will be gathered in Hell.
008|037|In order that Allah may distinguish the wicked from the good, stack the wicked upon each other, bundle them together, and cast them into Hell. These are the losers.
008|038|Tell the disbelievers: if they desist, what has passed will be forgiven them. But if they resume, the precedent of the ancients has already been established.
008|039|Fight them until there is no more oppression and religion belongs wholly to Allah. But if they cease, then Allah sees well all that they do.
008|040|Should they turn away, then know that Allah is your Protector. An excellent Protector and an excellent Helper.
008|041|Know that whatever spoils you acquire, a fifth of it is for Allah, the Messenger, the relatives, the orphans, the needy, and the refugees, provided you believe in Allah and in what We revealed to Our servant on the Day of Decisiveness—the day the two forces clashed. Allah has power over all things.
008|042|When you were on the near bank, they were on the far bank, and the caravan was below you. Had you made a mutual appointment, you would’ve failed to keep it. But Allah intended to accomplish a predestined matter, so that those who perished would perish by clear evidence, and those who survived would survive by clear evidence. Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.
008|043|When Allah made them appear few in your dream. Had He shown them to you as numerous, you would’ve faltered and would’ve disputed in the matter. But Allah saved the situation. He knows what lies within hearts.
008|044|When you confronted them, He made them appear fewer in your eyes, and made you appear fewer in their eyes, so that Allah might accomplish a matter already destined. To Allah, all matters are returned.
008|045|O you who believe! When you meet a detachment, stand firm and remember Allah much, so you may succeed.
008|046|Obey Allah and His Messenger, and don’t quarrel, lest you fail and your momentum dissipates. And be patient; Allah is with the patient.
008|047|Don’t be like those who left their homes boastfully, to be seen by people, and to obstruct Allah’s path. Allah encompasses what they do.
008|048|Satan made their deeds seem attractive to them, and said, “No one among the people can defeat you today, and I am by your side.” But, when the two parties sighted each other, he withdrew on his heels and said, “I am innocent of you; I see what you don’t see; I fear Allah, and Allah is severe in penalty.”
008|049|The hypocrites and those with sick hearts said, “Their religion deluded these people.” But whoever relies on Allah—Allah is Mighty and Wise.
008|050|If only you could see, when the angels take the souls of those who disbelieve, striking their faces and their backs: “Taste the suffering of the Blaze.”
008|051|This is because of what your hands sent ahead, and Allah is not unjust to the beings.
008|052|Similar to the situation of Pharaoh’s people and those before them. They denied Allah’s signs, so Allah seized them for their sins. Allah is powerful and severe in penalty.
008|053|This is because Allah would not change a blessing He bestowed upon a people until they change what’s within themselves. Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.
008|054|Similar to the situation of Pharaoh’s people and those before them. They rejected their Lord’s signs, so We destroyed them for their sins, and We drowned Pharaoh’s people. They were all wrongdoers.
008|055|The worst living creatures in Allah’s sight are those who disbelieve; they won’t believe.
008|056|Those with whom you’ve made a treaty, yet they breach their agreement every time—they aren’t righteous.
008|057|If you encounter them in battle, make them a fearsome example for others who follow them, so they may take heed.
008|058|If you fear betrayal from a people, throw back to them on equal terms. Allah doesn’t love the deceitful.
008|059|Let not the unbelievers assume they are ahead. They won’t cause failure.
008|060|Prepare against them all the forces and cavalry you can muster, to frighten thereby Allah’s enemies and your enemies, and others besides them unknown to you, but known to Allah. Whatever you spend in Allah’s way will be repaid to you fully, and you won’t be wronged.
008|061|And if they incline towards peace, incline towards it, and trust in Allah. Indeed He is the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing.
008|062|If they intend to deceive you, then Allah is sufficient for you. It is He who supported you with His help and with the believers.
008|063|And He united their hearts. Had you spent all that’s on earth, you couldn’t have united their hearts, but Allah united them. He is Mighty and Wise.
008|064|O Prophet, suffice yourself with Allah and the believers who follow you.
008|065|O Prophet, rouse the believers to fight. If there are among you twenty who are steadfast, they will defeat two hundred. And if there are a hundred of you, they will defeat a thousand of the unbelievers, for they are a people void of understanding.
008|066|Now, Allah has lightened your burden, knowing that you have a weakness. If there are a hundred steadfast among you, they will defeat two hundred. And if there are a thousand of you, they will defeat two thousand by Allah’s permission. Allah is with the patient.
008|067|It’s not for a prophet to take captives until he has thoroughly subdued the land. You desire the goods of this world, while Allah desires the Hereafter. Allah is Mighty and Wise.
008|068|Were it not for a prior decree from Allah, a severe punishment would’ve touched you for what you’ve taken.
008|069|So consume what you’ve gained, lawful and good, and remain conscious of Allah. Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
008|070|O Prophet, say to those who are captives in your custody, “If Allah knows any good in your hearts, He will give you something better than what was taken from you, and He will forgive you. Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.”
008|071|If they intend to betray you, they have previously betrayed Allah, and He overpowered them. Allah is Knowing and Wise.
008|072|Those who believed, emigrated, and striven in Allah’s way with their wealth and lives and those who provided shelter and assistance are allies of one another. However, for those who believed and didn’t emigrate, you owe them no protection until they emigrate. However, if they seek your assistance in faith, then you should support them, except against a people with whom you have a treaty. Allah observes all your actions.
008|073|The unbelievers are allies of one another. If you don’t do the same, there will be turmoil on earth and great corruption.
008|074|Those who believed, emigrated, and striven for Allah’s cause and those who provided shelter and aid are the true believers. For them is forgiveness and a generous provision.
008|075|As for those who have believed later, emigrated, and struggled alongside you, they are of you. However, according to the book of Allah, blood relations have precedence. Allah has knowledge of all things.
009|001|A declaration of dissolution from Allah and His Messenger is hereby issued to the polytheists with whom you had entered into a treaty.
009|002|Travel the land freely for four months, but be aware that you can’t evade Allah’s grip, and that Allah will disgrace the disbelievers.
009|003|A proclamation from Allah and His Messenger to all people on the day of the Great Pilgrimage: Allah disowns the polytheists, as does His Messenger. If you repent, it will be good for you, but if you turn away, know that you can’t evade Allah. Inform those who disbelieve of severe punishment.
009|004|However, to those polytheists with whom you’ve made a treaty, and who didn’t violate any of its terms, nor supported anyone against you, complete their treaty until its period. Allah loves the righteous.
009|005|When the Sacred Months have passed, slay the polytheists wherever you find them. Capture them, besiege them, and ambush them at every possible location. However, if they repent, establish prayer, and give in charity, let them go their way. Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
009|006|If any of the polytheists seeks your protection, grant it to him, so that he may hear the Word of Allah. Then escort him to where he can be safe, for they are a people who lack knowledge.
009|007|How can a treaty exist between Allah and His Messenger and the polytheists, except with those with whom you made a treaty at the Sacred Mosque? As long as they remain upright towards you, remain upright towards them. Allah loves the righteous.
009|008|How can it be when they gain dominance over you, they respect neither kinship nor treaty with you? They appease you with their mouths, but their hearts refuse, and most of them are sinful.
009|009|They sold Allah’s verses for a trivial gain and obstructed His path. How awful is what they’ve been doing.
009|010|Towards a believer, they respect neither kinship nor treaty. These are the aggressors.
009|011|If they repent, establish prayer, and give in charity, then they are your brothers in faith. We explain the verses for people who know.
009|012|However, if they violate their oaths after their treaty, and they attack your religion, then fight the leaders of disbelief, for their oaths are nothing to them, so they may cease.
009|013|Will you not fight against those who broke their oaths, sought to expel the Messenger, and initiated hostilities against you? Do you fear them? Allah is the one you should fear, if you are believers.
009|014|Fight them; Allah will punish them by your hands, disgrace them, give you victory over them, and heal the hearts of a believing people.
009|015|And He makes the anger in their hearts subside. And Allah forgives whomever He wills; Allah is Knowing and Wise.
009|016|Do you think you will be left without Allah distinguishing those among you who strive and form alliances solely with Allah, His Messenger, and the believers? Allah is Acquainted with what you do.
009|017|The polytheists, steadfast in their disbelief, are not fit to maintain Allah’s sanctuaries. Their deeds have become worthless, and they will reside eternally in the Fire.
009|018|Allah’s sanctuaries are only maintained by those who have believed in Allah and the Last Day, establish prayer, give purifying alms, and fear none but Allah. These individuals are most likely to be guided.
009|019|Do you equate providing water to pilgrims and maintaining the Sacred Mosque with those who believe in Allah and the Last Day, and strive in the cause of Allah? They aren’t equal in Allah’s sight. Allah doesn’t guide the unjust people.
009|020|Those who believe, emigrate, and strive with their wealth and lives in Allah’s path hold a higher rank in Allah’s sight. These are the successful ones.
009|021|Their Lord gives them good news of His mercy and approval and gardens where they will enjoy eternal bliss.
009|022|They will abide there forever. With Allah is a great reward.
009|023|O you who believe, don’t take your parents and siblings as allies if they favor disbelief over faith. Whoever of you does so, those are the wrongdoers.
009|024|Say, “If your parents, children, siblings, spouses, relatives, the wealth you’ve acquired, the business you fear may decline, and the homes you cherish are dearer to you than Allah, His Messenger, and striving in His path, then wait until Allah brings about His decree.” Allah doesn’t guide the sinful people.
009|025|Allah granted you victories in numerous regions, but on the day of Hunain, your vast numbers impressed you, yet they availed you nothing. The earth, vast as it is, seemed to close in on you, and you turned back in retreat.
009|026|Then, Allah sent down His tranquility upon His Messenger and the believers. He sent down forces you didn’t see and tormented those disbelieving. This is the compensation for the unbelievers.
009|027|Afterward, Allah will relent towards whom He wills. Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
009|028|O you who believe, the Idolaters are impure, so they shouldn’t approach the Sacred Mosque after this year. If you fear financial loss, Allah will enrich you out of His grace, if He wills. Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise.
009|029|Fight those who don’t believe in Allah or the Last Day from among the People of the Scripture, who don’t forbid what Allah and His Messenger have forbidden, and who don’t embrace the religion of truth, until they pay the tax willingly and feel subdued.
009|030|The Jews say, “Uzair is the son of Allah,” and the Christians say, “The Messiah is the son of Allah.” These are their words; they mimic the utterances of those who disbelieved before. May Allah destroy them; how misguided they are!
009|031|They’ve taken their priests and saints as lords besides Allah; as well as the Messiah, the son of Mary. Yet, they were commanded to worship only One God. There is no god but He. Glory be to Him above what they associate with Him.
009|032|They seek to extinguish Allah’s light with their words, but Allah is insistent upon perfecting His light, despite the hatred of the unbelievers.
009|033|It is He who sent His Messenger with guidance and the religion of truth, to make it prevail over all religions, despite the hatred of the associators.
009|034|O you who believe, many religious leaders and scholars consume people’s wealth wrongfully and deter from the path of Allah. To those who hoard gold and silver, and don’t spend it in Allah’s way, announce to them a painful punishment.
009|035|On the day when it will be heated in the fire of Hell, and with it their foreheads, sides, and backs will be branded: “This is what you hoarded for yourselves, so taste what you hoarded.”
009|036|Since the day Allah created the heavens and the earth, Allah ordained twelve months in a year, four of which are sanctified. This is the correct order, so make no mistake about them. Fight the polytheists collectively, as they fight you collectively, and know that Allah is with the righteous.
009|037|Postponement is an increase in disbelief, leading the unbelievers astray. They permit it one year and forbid it another, to align with the number sanctified by Allah, thus allowing what Allah has prohibited. Their evil deeds are made appealing to them. Allah does not guide the disbelieving people.
009|038|O you who believe, when you’re called to mobilize in Allah’s way, why do you cling heavily to the earth? Do you prefer the worldly life over the Hereafter? The enjoyment of this earthly life, compared to the Hereafter, is insignificant.
009|039|If you don’t mobilize, He will inflict a severe punishment upon you and replace you with another people. And you won’t harm Him in the least. Allah is capable of all things.
009|040|If you don’t support him, Allah has already supported him. When the unbelievers expelled him, he was one of two in the cave; he said to his friend, “Don’t worry, Allah is with us.” Then, Allah sent down His tranquility upon him, reinforced him with troops you didn’t see, and made the word of the unbelievers the lowest, while Allah’s word is the highest. Allah is Mighty and Wise.
009|041|Mobilize, light or heavy, and strive with your wealth and lives in Allah’s cause. This is better for you, if you only knew.
009|042|They would’ve followed you if there had been immediate gain and a short journey, but the distance seemed too great for them. They will swear by Allah, “If we could, we would’ve gone out with you.” They destroy themselves, and Allah knows that they are lying.
009|043|Allah would pardon you! Why did you give them leave before it became clear to you those who were truthful and you knew the liars?
009|044|Those who genuinely believe in Allah and the Last Day wouldn’t seek exemption from striving with their wealth and their lives. Allah is fully aware of the righteous.
009|045|Only those who don’t believe in Allah and the Last Day seek exemption from you. Their hearts are filled with doubt, and they waver in their indecision.
009|046|Had they intended to mobilize, they would’ve made some preparation for it. However, Allah disapproved of their departure, so He held them back, and they were told, “Stay with those who remain behind.”
009|047|Had they mobilized with you, they would’ve only added to your difficulties, spreading rumors and discord among you. Some of you are prone to listen to them. Allah is fully aware of the wrongdoers.
009|048|They sought dissension before and turned matters for you, until the truth emerged, and Allah’s decree prevailed, much to their dismay.
009|049|Among them are those who say, “Please excuse me, and don’t tempt me.” They have already fallen into temptation. Hell will engulf the unbelievers.
009|050|If good fortune comes your way, it troubles them, but if a calamity strikes you, they say, “We had taken our precautions in advance,” and they depart rejoicing.
009|051|Say, “Nothing will happen to us except what Allah has destined for us. He is our Protector. In Allah should the believers place their trust.”
009|052|Say, “You can anticipate for us one of two favorable outcomes, while we await for you either Allah’s punishment or defeat at our hands. So wait; we, too, are waiting.”
009|053|Say, “Spend willingly or unwillingly, it won’t be accepted from you, for you are a wicked people.”
009|054|Their contributions aren’t accepted because they reject Allah and His Messenger. Furthermore, they only attend prayer lazily, and they spend only grudgingly.
009|055|Let not their wealth or their children impress you. Allah intends to torment them with them in this life, and their souls depart while they are unbelievers.
009|056|They swear by Allah that they are of you, but they are not of you. They are people who cause discord.
009|057|If they could find a refuge, a cave, or any place to retreat, they would rush headlong to it.
009|058|Among them are those who criticize you regarding the distribution of alms. If they are given a portion, they are pleased, but if they are not given, they become angry.
009|059|They should be satisfied with what Allah and His Messenger have given them, saying, “Allah is sufficient for us. Allah will grant us from His bounty, and so will His Messenger. We are toward Allah desirous.”
009|060|The charities are for the poor, the needy, its administrators, for reconciling hearts, for the freeing of slaves, for those in debt, for Allah’s cause, and for the homeless. This is a decree from Allah, and Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise.
009|061|Among them are those who slander the Prophet, saying, “He is all ears.” Say, “He listens for your good. He believes in Allah, trusts the believers, and is a mercy to those who believe among you.” Those who slander Allah’s Messenger, for them is a painful punishment.
009|062|They swear by Allah to appease you. However, it is Allah and His Messenger they should seek to please, if they are believers.
009|063|Don’t they know that whoever opposes Allah and His Messenger, for him is the Fire of Hell, to remain in it eternally? That is the great humiliation.
009|064|The hypocrites are apprehensive that a Chapter may be revealed that will inform them of what’s in their hearts. Say, “Mock on, but Allah will expose what you fear.”
009|065|If you question them, they will say, “We were only conversing and playing.” Say, “Do you make a mockery of Allah, His revelations, and His Messenger?”
009|066|Make no excuses. You have disbelieved after your belief. Should we forgive some of you, we will punish others: they have been guilty sinners.
009|067|The hypocritical men and women are akin to one another. They order what is wrong, forbid what is right, and they close their hands. They forgot Allah, so He disregards them. The hypocrites are the sinners.
009|068|Allah has promised the hypocrites, men and women, and the unbelievers the Fire of Hell, where they will dwell forever. It is their just compensation. Allah has cursed them, and they will endure perpetual torment.
009|069|They are like those before you who were stronger, wealthier, and had more offspring. They enjoyed their own benefit, and you’ve enjoyed your own benefit, and you indulged the same as they indulged. Their deeds have become worthless in this world and the Hereafter. They are the losers.
009|070|Didn’t they hear the stories of their predecessors—the people of Noah, Aad, Thamud, the people of Abraham, the inhabitants of Midian, and the Overturned Cities? Their messengers came to them with clear signs. Allah didn’t wrong them, it was themselves they wronged.
009|071|The believing men and women are allies of one another. They advocate righteousness, forbid evil, establish prayer, give in charity, and obey Allah and His Messenger. Those—Allah will have mercy on them. Allah is Mighty and Wise.
009|072|Allah promised the believing men and women gardens through which rivers flow, where they will abide forever, and beautiful mansions in the Gardens of Eternity. But the greatest of all is Allah’s approval. This is the ultimate triumph.
009|073|O Prophet, strive against the unbelievers and the hypocrites, and be harsh with them. Their ultimate abode is Hell—a terrible destination.
009|074|They swear by Allah that they said nothing, yet they did utter words of disbelief and renounced faith after their submission. They plotted things beyond their reach. Their resentment only arises because Allah and His Messenger have enriched them through His favor. If they repent, it will be better for them. But if they turn away, Allah will severely punish them in this world and the Hereafter. They will have no protector or helper on earth.
009|075|Among them are those who pledged to Allah: “If he gives us from his bounty, we will give in charity and be among the righteous.”
009|076|Yet, when He bestowed His bounty upon them, they were stingy with it, turned their backs, and distanced themselves.
009|077|Thus, He punished them with hypocrisy in their hearts, until the Day they will meet Him, due to their breach of their promise to Allah and their dishonesty.
009|078|Don’t they know that Allah knows their secrets and their private conversations, and that Allah is the Knower of the unseen?
009|079|Those who criticize the believers who willingly give out in charity, and ridicule those who find nothing to give except their own efforts, Allah will ridicule them, and they will have a painful punishment.
009|080|Whether you ask forgiveness for them or not, even if you were to ask for it seventy times, Allah will not forgive them. This is because they denied Allah and His Messenger. Allah doesn’t guide the immoral people.
009|081|Those who stayed behind rejoiced in staying behind the Messenger of Allah, and they disliked striving with their wealth and lives in Allah’s cause. They said, “Don’t venture out in the heat.” Say, “The fire of Hell is hotter still—if only they could understand.”
009|082|So let them laugh a little and cry much as recompense for what they used to earn.
009|083|If Allah returns you to a group of them, and they ask for your permission to go out, say, “You will never march with me, nor will you fight an enemy with me. You were content to remain inactive the first time, so stay with those who stay behind.”
009|084|Never pray for any of them who dies, nor shall you stand at his graveside. They denied Allah and His Messenger, and they died while they were sinners.
009|085|Let not their wealth and their children impress you. Allah wants to punish them via them in this life, and their souls pass away while they are unbelievers.
009|086|When a chapter is revealed, stating: “Believe in Allah and strive with His Messenger,” the affluent among them ask for your exemption, saying, “Let us be with those who stay behind.”
009|087|They are content to be with those who stay behind; their hearts were sealed, so they don’t understand.
009|088|However, the Messenger and those who believed with him strive with their wealth and their lives. For these will be the good things, and it is they who will be successful.
009|089|Allah has prepared for them gardens under which rivers flow, wherein they will abide forever. That’s the supreme success.
009|090|Some Desert Arabs came with excuses, seeking an exemption, and those who lied to Allah and His Messenger sat. A painful punishment will strike those among them who disbelieved.
009|091|There is no blame upon the weak, nor upon the sick, nor upon those who find nothing to spend, provided they are true toward Allah and His messenger. There is no blame on those who do good. Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
009|092|Nor on those who, when they came to you asking to be transported, and you said, “I have nothing to transport you on,” they turned away, their eyes overflowing with tears out of sadness that they couldn’t find the means to spend.
009|093|The blame lies only with those who ask your permission while they are wealthy. They prefer to remain with those who stay behind, and Allah has sealed their hearts, leaving them devoid of understanding.
009|094|They will make excuses to you when you return to them. Say, “Don’t make excuses; we won’t believe you. Allah has informed us of your intentions. Allah and His Messenger will observe your actions, and you will be returned to the Knower of the unseen and the seen, who will inform you of everything you did.”
009|095|Upon your return to them, they will swear by Allah, hoping you will accept their excuses. Distance yourself from them, for they are impure, and their dwelling is Hell—a just compensation for their actions.
009|096|They swear to you to gain your approval, but even if you approve of them, Allah doesn’t approve of the sinful people.
009|097|The Desert Arabs are the staunchest in disbelief and hypocrisy, and least likely to know the boundaries that Allah revealed to His Messenger. Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise.
009|098|Among the Desert Arabs, some consider what they spend as a loss, and they await misfortunes to befall you. Yet, they will be afflicted by misfortunes. Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.
009|099|However, among the Desert Arabs are those who believe in Allah and the Last Day, and regard their contributions as a means to draw closer to Allah, and the prayers of the Messenger. Indeed, it will bring them nearer, and Allah will admit them into His mercy. Allah is Forgiving, Most Merciful.
009|100|The pioneers—the first of the Emigrants and the Helpers—and those who followed them in goodness: Allah is pleased with them, and they are pleased with Him. He prepared for them Gardens through which rivers flow, where they will dwell forever. This is the supreme achievement.
009|101|Among the Desert Arabs around you, some are hypocrites, as well as among the city dwellers. They are persistent in hypocrisy. You don’t know them, but We certainly do. We will punish them twice; then they will be returned to a severe punishment.
009|102|And there are those who admit their sins, and they have mixed a righteous deed with another that was bad. Perhaps Allah will relent towards them. Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
009|103|Receive from their wealth a charity to purify and cleanse them, and pray for them. Your prayers bring them tranquility. Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.
009|104|Don’t they know that it is Allah who accepts repentance from His beings and receives charities, and that it is Allah who is the Acceptor of repentance and the Merciful?
009|105|Say, “Work! Allah will see your work and so will His Messenger and the believers. Then you will be returned to the Knower of the unseen and the seen, and He will inform you of everything you did.”
009|106|And others deferred to the decree of Allah, whether He will punish them or whether He will forgive them. Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise.
009|107|Those who have established a mosque with the intent to cause harm, promote disbelief, sow discord among believers, and as an outpost for those who have previously waged war against Allah and His Messenger, they will swear, “we intended nothing but good.” Still, Allah bears witness that they are liars.
009|108|Don’t ever stand therein. A mosque established on righteousness from its very beginning is more deserving of your attendance. Within it are men who love to purify themselves, and Allah loves those who purify themselves.
009|109|Is one who lays the foundation of his building based on righteousness and seeking Allah’s approval better, or one who erects his building on the brink of a collapsing cliff that collapses with him into the fire of Hell? Allah does not guide the wrongdoing people.
009|110|The building which they built won’t cease to be a cause of skepticism in their hearts, until their hearts are cut. Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise.
009|111|Allah has bought from the believers their lives and their wealth because Paradise is for them. They fight for Allah’s cause. They slay and are slain. This promise is binding on Him in the Torah, the Gospel, and the Quran. Who is more faithful to his covenant than Allah? So, rejoice in the deal you’ve made. This is the ultimate triumph.
009|112|Those who repent, worship, praise, journey, bow down, prostrate themselves, advocate for righteousness, forbid evil, and observe Allah’s limits—give good news to the believers.
009|113|It’s not for the Prophet and the believers to seek forgiveness for the polytheists, even if they were their relatives, after it became clear to them that they are inhabitants of the blazing Fire.
009|114|Abraham’s plea for his father’s forgiveness was only due to a promise he had made to him. But when it became clear to him that he is an enemy to Allah, he dissociated himself from him. Abraham was compassionate and forbearing.
009|115|Allah wouldn’t misguide a people after He has guided them, until He has made clear to them what they should avoid. Allah is knowledgeable of all things.
009|116|To Allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth; He gives life and causes death. You have no protector or helper other than Allah.
009|117|Allah accepted the repentance of the Prophet, the emigrants, and the helpers who followed him during the hour of difficulty, after the hearts of a group of them had almost deviated. Then, He accepted their repentance. He is Kind and Merciful towards them.
009|118|Also, the three were left behind; until, the earth, in all its vastness, became constricted for them, and their souls became narrowed for them, and they realized that there was no refuge from Allah, except toward Him. Then, He turned to them in mercy so they could repent. Allah is the Acceptor of Repentance, the Most Merciful.
009|119|O you who believe, fear Allah, and be among the truthful.
009|120|It’s not for the inhabitants of the city and the Desert Arabs around them to stay behind Allah’s Messenger, or to prefer themselves over him. Because they don’t suffer from thirst, fatigue, or hunger striving in the cause of Allah, nor take a step that infuriates the unbelievers, nor gain any advantage over an enemy, but it is recorded for them as a righteous deed. Truly, Allah does not waste the reward of those who do good.
009|121|No expenditure they make, small or large, or any ground they march across, will go unrecorded for them. Allah will reward them according to the best of their deeds.
009|122|It is not for the believers to march out altogether. From every division that sets out, a group from each division should remain behind to gain knowledge in the religion, and to warn their people when they return to them, so they may beware.
009|123|O you who believe, fight those of the unbelievers who attack you, and let them find harshness in you; and know that Allah is with the righteous.
009|124|Whenever a chapter is revealed, some of them ask, “Which of you has this increased in faith?” As for those who have believed, it increases their faith and they are rejoicing.
009|125|But as for those in whose hearts is disease, it increases their filth to their filth; and they die while they are unbelievers.
009|126|Don’t they see that they are tested once or twice every year? They still neither repent, nor do they remember.
009|127|Whenever a chapter is revealed, they glance at each other, asking, “Does anyone see you?” Then, they turn away. Allah has turned their hearts away, because they are a people who don’t understand.
009|128|There has come to you a messenger from among yourselves. Your hardship distresses him; he is deeply concerned for you; to the believers, he is kind and merciful.
009|129|But if they turn away, say, “Allah is sufficient for me. There is no god but He. On Him I have relied, and He is the Lord of the Grand Throne.”
010|001|Alif. Lam. Ra. These are the verses of the Wise Book.
010|002|Is it a wonder to people that We revealed to a man from among them: “Warn humankind, and give good news to those who believe that they have a sure footing with their Lord?” Yet the unbelievers say, “This is definitely an obvious magician.”
010|003|Your Lord is Allah, who created the heavens and the earth in six periods, then established Himself on the Throne, governing all affairs. There is no intercessor except after His permission. That is Allah, your Lord, so worship Him. Will you not reflect?
010|004|To Him is your return, all of you. The promise of Allah is true. He originates creation, then He repeats it, to reward those who believe and perform righteous deeds with justice. But for those who disbelieve, for them is a drink of boiling water and painful punishment due to their denial.
010|005|It is He who made the sun shining and the moon luminous, and determined its phases, so you may calculate the years and the passage of time. Allah didn’t create this except with truth. He explains the signs in detail for people who know.
010|006|In the alternation of night and day, and in what Allah created in the heavens and the earth, are signs for people who are mindful.
010|007|Those who don’t anticipate meeting Us and are content with life in this world, feel safe in it, and are ignorant of Our signs.
010|008|For them, their refuge will be the Fire, because of what they used to earn.
010|009|But for those who believe and perform righteous deeds, their Lord will guide them by their faith. Rivers will flow beneath them in the Gardens of Bliss.
010|010|Their prayer therein will be, “Glorified are You, O Allah,” and their greeting therein will be, “Peace.” And the conclusion of their prayer will be, “Praise be to Allah, the Lord of the universes.”
010|011|If Allah were to hasten evil for people, as they hasten good, their time would have been over. But We leave those who don’t look forward to meeting Us in their transgressions, blundering.
010|012|When adversity touches a person, he prays to Us, whether lying on his side, sitting, or standing. But when We remove his adversity, he proceeds as if he had not reached out to Us in a predicament. Thus, the deeds of the transgressors are made to appear pleasing to them.
010|013|We destroyed generations before you when they committed injustices. Their messengers had come to them with clear proofs, but were not going to believe. Thus do We recompense the guilty people.
010|014|Then We made you successors in the earth after them—to see how you will behave.
010|015|When Our clear verses are conveyed to them, those who don’t expect to meet Us say, “Bring us a Quran other than this, or change it.” Say, “It’s not for me to modify it of my own. I only follow what’s revealed to me. Should I disobey my Lord, I fear the punishment of a great Day.”
010|016|Say, “Had Allah willed, I wouldn’t have conveyed it to you, nor would He have made it known to you. I have lived among you a lifetime before it; will you not use your reason?”
010|017|Who is more unjust than he who invents a lie about Allah or denies His signs? Surely, the transgressors won’t succeed.
010|018|They worship, aside from Allah, what can neither harm them nor benefit them, and they say, “These are our intercessors with Allah.” Say, “Are you informing Allah of something He doesn’t know in the heavens or on earth?” Glorified is He and far above what they associate with Him.
010|019|Humanity was once a single community, before differences emerged. If not for a prior decree from your Lord, their disputes would’ve been settled.
010|020|They say, “If only a miracle from his Lord would come to him.” Say, “The unseen belongs to Allah. So wait; I am waiting with you.”
010|021|When We grant humans mercy after hardship has touched them, they scheme against Our revelations. Say, “Allah is swifter in planning.” Indeed, Our messengers write down what you scheme.
010|022|It is He who transports you across land and sea. When you are aboard ships, sailing with a favorable wind, rejoicing in it, a gale strikes. The waves come at them from every side, and they think they are encompassed, they call upon Allah, devoting their religion sincerely to Him: “If You save us from this, we will surely be among the thankful.”
010|023|But when He saves them, they transgress unjustly on earth. O people, your transgression is only against yourselves—the enjoyment of worldly life. Then, to Us is your return, and We will inform you of what you used to do.
010|024|The likeness of the life of this world is as water which We send down from the sky; it mingles with the earth’s vegetation from which people and animals eat. But when the earth takes on its adornment and is beautified, and its people think they have mastery over it, Our order comes to it, by night or by day, and We render it a harvested field, as if it had not flourished the day before. So do We explain the verses for a people who ponder.
010|025|Allah invites to the Home of Peace and guides whom He wills to a straight path.
010|026|For those who do good, there is excellence, and more. No darkness will cover their faces, nor will they be humiliated. These are the inhabitants of Paradise, dwelling therein forever.
010|027|Those who commit evil will be repaid with an equivalent evil, and humiliation will cover them. They will have no one to protect them from Allah—as if their faces are covered with pieces of the pitch-dark night. These are the inhabitants of the Fire, where they will abide eternally.
010|028|On the Day when We gather them all together, We will say to those who associated, “Stay in your place, you and your partners.” We will separate between them, and their partners will say, “It wasn’t us you were worshiping.”
010|029|“Allah is sufficient as a witness between us and you; we were unaware of your worship.”
010|030|There, every soul will be recompensed for its deeds. They will be returned to Allah, their Lord, the True, and the false gods they invented will vanish from them.
010|031|Ask them, “Who sustains you from the heavens and the earth? Who controls hearing and sight? Who brings the living from the dead, and the dead from the living? Who orchestrates all affairs?” They will answer, “Allah.” Then say, “Won’t you be cautious?”
010|032|This is Allah, your true Lord. What is there beyond truth except falsehood? How are you then turned away?
010|033|Thus is the word of your Lord justified against those who sin: they don’t believe.
010|034|Say, “Can any of your associates initiate creation and then repeat it?” Say, “Allah initiates creation and then repeats it. How are you led astray?”
010|035|Say, “Can any of your associates guide to the truth?” Say, “Allah alone guides to the truth. Is He who guides to the truth more deserving of being followed, or he who does not guide unless he himself is guided? What is wrong with you? How do you judge?”
010|036|The majority of them follow nothing but conjecture, which can never replace the truth. Allah is aware of what they do.
010|037|This Quran could not have been fabricated by someone other than Allah. It confirms what came before it and thoroughly explains the Scripture. There is no doubt about it; it is from the Lord of the universes.
010|038|Or do they say, “He made it up”? Say, “Then produce a chapter like it, and call upon anyone you can, other than Allah, if you are truthful.”
010|039|They reject what they can’t comprehend, even before its interpretation reaches them. Likewise, those before them also rejected the truth. So, observe the fate of the wrongdoers.
010|040|Among them are those who believe in it, and those who don’t. Your Lord knows best about the corruptors.
010|041|If they accuse you of lying, say, “For me are my deeds, and for you are yours. You are innocent of what I do, and I am innocent of what you do.”
010|042|Among them are those who listen to you. But can you make the deaf hear, even though they can’t comprehend?
010|043|Among them are those who look at you. But can you guide the blind, even if they can’t see?
010|044|Allah doesn’t do any injustice to people, instead, people do injustice to themselves.
010|045|On the Day when He gathers them all, it will seem as if they had only lingered for an hour of a day, familiarizing themselves with each other. Those who denied the encounter with Allah and were not guided will be the ones to suffer loss.
010|046|Whether We show you some of what We’ve promised them, or We take your life before that, their ultimate return is to Us. Then, Allah is the Witness over what they do.
010|047|Every nation has a messenger. When their messenger arrives, judgment is passed upon them justly, and they won’t be wronged.
010|048|They inquire, “When will this promise be fulfilled, if you are truthful?”
010|049|Reply, “I have no control over any harm or benefit to myself, except as Allah wills. For every nation, there is a predetermined time. When their time arrives, they can neither delay it by an hour nor advance it.”
010|050|Say, “Have you considered: whether His punishment comes to you by night or by day, how much of it will the criminals seek to hasten?”
010|051|“Will you only believe when it happens? Now? Even though you were impatient for it?”
010|052|Then, those who acted unjustly will be told, “Taste the everlasting torment. Are you being compensated except for what you used to earn?”
010|053|They question you, “Is this the truth?” Respond, “Yes, by my Lord, it’s the truth, and you can’t escape from it.”
010|054|If every wrongdoer possessed all that exists on earth, he would seek to ransom himself by it. Yet, when they witness the punishment, they will conceal their regret. They will be judged justly, and they won’t be wronged.
010|055|Unquestionably! All that’s in the heavens and on earth belongs to Allah. Indeed, the promise of Allah is always true, yet most of them don’t have the knowledge.
010|056|It is He who gives life and causes death, and to Him you will be returned.
010|057|O mankind, there has come to you advice from your Lord and healing for what’s in the hearts, and guidance and mercy for the believers.
010|058|Say, “In the grace and mercy of Allah, let them rejoice. It is better than what they hoard.”
010|059|Say, “Did you consider what Allah sent down to you of provision, and yet you’ve made some of it lawful and some of it unlawful?” Ask, “Does Allah give you permission, or are you inventing lies about Allah?”
010|060|What will those who fabricate falsehoods about Allah think on Resurrection Day? Allah is bountiful towards humankind, but most of them aren’t grateful.
010|061|Whatever activity you conduct, any portion of the Quran you recite, or whatever you are doing, We are witness over you when you are engaged in it. Not even an atom’s weight in the earth or sky escapes your Lord’s knowledge, nor is there anything smaller or larger that isn’t documented in a clear record.
010|062|Indeed, Allah’s allies will have no fear, nor will they grieve.
010|063|Those who believe and are righteous.
010|064|There is good news for them in this life and the Hereafter. Allah’s promises are unchangeable. That is the supreme victory.
010|065|Let not their words dishearten you. All power and honor belong to Allah; He is the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing.
010|066|Everything in the heavens and earth belongs to Allah. Those who invoke others besides Allah aren’t truly following associates; they follow nothing but conjecture and what their own selves desire.
010|067|It is He who made the night for your rest and the day making things visible. In this are signs for those who listen.
010|068|They say, “Allah has begotten a son.” Glorified is He; He is the Self-Sufficient. Everything in the heavens and on earth is His. Do you have any evidence for this, or are you attributing what you don’t know to Allah?
010|069|Say, “Those who fabricate lies about Allah won’t succeed.”
010|070|Some enjoyment in this life, but they will ultimately return to Us, and We will subject them to severe punishment for their disbelief.
010|071|Tell them the story of Noah, who said to his people, “O my people, if my presence among you and my reminders of Allah’s messages are burdensome to you, I have placed my trust in Allah. So, gather your plan, with your associates, make your intentions clear, and don’t hesitate.”
010|072|“If you turn away, I didn’t ask you for any wage; my reward is only from Allah, and I was commanded to be among those who submit.”
010|073|Yet, they rejected him. So, We saved him and those with him in the Ark, made them successors, and drowned those who denied Our revelations. Observe the end of those who were warned.
010|074|After him, We sent other messengers to their peoples, and they came to them with clear proofs. But they were not to believe what they had initially denied. Thus, We seal over the hearts of the transgressors.
010|075|Then, after them, We sent Moses and Aaron, with Our signs, to Pharaoh and his chiefs. But they showed arrogance, and they were indeed a criminal people.
010|076|When the truth from Us came to them, they said, “This is nothing but clear magic.”
010|077|Moses replied, “Do you call the truth magic when it comes to you? Magicians won’t succeed.”
010|078|They said, “Did you come to divert us from the traditions of our ancestors and gain supremacy in the land? We will never believe in you.”
010|079|Pharaoh then commanded, “Bring to me every knowledgeable sorcerer.”
010|080|When the magicians came, Moses said to them, “Throw down whatever you will.”
010|081|And when they cast their spells, Moses said, “What you’ve produced is a mere illusion, and Allah will nullify it. Allah doesn’t let the work of the corrupters succeed.”
010|082|“Allah confirms the truth with His words, even if the wrongdoers hate it.”
010|083|Only a minority from his own people believed in Moses, fearing Pharaoh’s tyranny and his priests’ retribution. Pharaoh was arrogant in the land, and he was one of the transgressors.
010|084|Moses urged, “O my people, if you have believed in Allah, then rely upon Him, if you have submitted.”
010|085|They responded, “In Allah, we place our trust. Our Lord, make us not a trial for the wrongdoing people.”
010|086|“And, through Your mercy, deliver us from the disbelieving people.”
010|087|We revealed to Moses and his brother: “Establish homes in Egypt for your people, make your homes places of worship, perform the prayers, and give good news to the believers.”
010|088|Moses prayed: “Our Lord, You’ve given Pharaoh and his elites splendor and wealth in the worldly life, our Lord, that they may lead people astray from your path. Our Lord, obliterate their wealth and harden their hearts, so they won’t believe until they witness the severe punishment.”
010|089|He replied, “Your prayer has been answered. Remain upright, and don’t follow the path of those who lack knowledge.”
010|090|We led the Children of Israel across the sea, while Pharaoh and his troops pursued them with hostility and aggression. When the certainty of drowning dawned upon him, he said, “I believe that there is no god except the One in whom the Children of Israel believe, and I am among the submitters.”
010|091|Now? And before you were disobeying and were among the corrupters?
010|092|Today, We will preserve your body, as a sign for those who come after you. Yet most people are oblivious to Our signs.
010|093|We granted the Children of Israel a privileged status and gave them good things. However, they didn’t differ until after knowledge had come to them. Your Lord will resolve their disputes on Resurrection Day.
010|094|If you doubt what We’ve revealed to you, ask those who have been reading the Scripture before you. The truth has come to you from your Lord, so don’t be among the doubters.
010|095|And don’t be among those who deny Allah’s messages, lest you be among the losers.
010|096|Those upon whom your Lord’s decree has been realized won’t believe.
010|097|Even if every sign were to come to them—until they see the severe punishment.
010|098|No community has ever believed and benefited from their faith except the people of Jonah. When they believed, We lifted from them the torment of disgrace in this worldly life, and We permitted them to enjoy for a while.
010|099|If your Lord had willed, everyone on earth would have believed. Would you then compel people to become believers?
010|100|No soul can believe except by the permission of Allah. And He places defilement upon those who don’t reason.
010|101|Say, “Observe what’s in the heavens and the earth.” But neither signs nor warnings will avail those who don’t believe.
010|102|Do they expect anything but the likes of the days of those who passed before them? Say, “Then wait; I am waiting with you.”
010|103|Thus, We rescue Our messengers and those who believe. Thus, it is incumbent upon Us to save the believers.
010|104|Say, “O people, if you doubt my religion, I don’t worship those whom you worship besides Allah, but I worship Allah, who ultimately takes your life. I have been commanded to be among the believers.”
010|105|Be upright to the religion of pure monotheism, and never count yourself among the polytheists.
010|106|Don’t call upon entities other than Allah, who can neither benefit nor harm you. If you do so, you position yourself with the wrongdoers.
010|107|If Allah touches you with harm, there is no one to remove it but Him. And if He intends goodness for you, there is none who can repel His Favor. He bestows it upon whom He wills of His servants. He is the Forgiving, the Merciful.
010|108|Say, “O people, the truth has come to you from your Lord. He who accepts guidance, does so for his own good; he who goes astray, does so at his own peril. I am not a manager over you.”
010|109|Follow what has been revealed to you, and be patient until Allah brings about His judgment. He is the best of judges.
011|001|Alif. Lam. Ra. A Book whose verses were perfected, then detailed, from the One who is All-Wise, All-Knowing.
011|002|Worship none but Allah. “I am to you from Him a warner, and a bearer of good news.”
011|003|“Seek forgiveness from your Lord and repent to Him. He will grant you enjoyment of good for a time appointed, and bestow His grace on every possessor of grace. But if you turn away, I fear for you the punishment of a momentous Day.”
011|004|To Allah is your return, and He is capable of everything.
011|005|They conceal their inner selves as if to hide from Him. Even when they cover themselves with their clothes, He knows what they conceal and disclose. He is aware of what lies within the hearts.
011|006|Every living being on earth depends on Allah for its sustenance. He knows its dwelling and its repository. All is in a clear record.
011|007|It is He who created the heavens and the earth in six periods while His throne was upon the water, to test who among you is best in conduct. If you say, “You will be resurrected after death,” those who disbelieve will say, “This is nothing but obvious sorcery.”
011|008|If We postpone their punishment until a set time, they will question, “What holds it back?” On the day it reaches them, it won’t be averted from them, and they will be trapped by what they used to ridicule.
011|009|If We give man a taste of mercy from Us, and then We withdraw it from him, he is despairing and ungrateful.
011|010|But if We let him taste a favor after hardship has touched him, he will say, “Gone are afflictions from me.” He becomes joyful and proud.
011|011|Except for those who are patient and do righteous deeds—for them is forgiveness and a great reward.
011|012|Perhaps you would leave some of what’s revealed to you, and you may be disheartened because they say, “Why has no treasure been sent down to him?” or “An angel came with him?” You are just a warner, and Allah is a custodian over everything.
011|013|Or do they say, “He made it up?” Say, “Then produce ten similar chapters, made up, and call upon whomsoever you can—excluding Allah—if you are truthful.”
011|014|If they don’t respond to you, then know that it was revealed with Allah’s knowledge, and that there is no god except Him. So, will you then not surrender?
011|015|Those who desire the worldly life and its adornments—We will pay them fully for their deeds in it, without any reduction.
011|016|These are the ones, who, in the Hereafter, will have nothing but the Fire. Their efforts will have been wasted, and their actions become void.
011|017|Is one who relies on clear evidence from his Lord, reinforced by testimony from Him? Before this, the Scripture of Moses for guidance and mercy, and they believe in it. But whoever denies it from the factions, the Fire is his promised destination. So, don’t doubt it. It’s the truth from your Lord, but most people refuse to believe.
011|018|Who is more unjust than one who invents a lie against Allah? These will be presented before their Lord, and the witnesses will proclaim, “These are the ones who lied concerning their Lord.” Behold, the curse of Allah is upon the wrongdoers.
011|019|Those who deter others from Allah’s path, seek to twist it, and they are unbelievers in the Hereafter.
011|020|They will find no escape on earth, nor any protectors apart from Allah. For them, the punishment will be multiplied, as they could not hear, and they could not see.
011|021|These are the ones who have lost their souls, and the illusions they invented have vanished from them.
011|022|Indeed, in the Hereafter, they will be the greatest losers.
011|023|As for those who believe, do righteous deeds, and humble themselves before their Lord, they will be the inhabitants of Paradise, residing there forever.
011|024|Consider the two groups: one is blind and deaf, while the other can see and hear. Are they equal in comparison? Will you not think?
011|025|We sent Noah to his people, saying, “I am a clear warner to you.”
011|026|“Worship none but Allah. I fear for you the torment of a painful Day.”
011|027|The disbelieving nobles among his people responded, “We see you as nothing more than a man like us, and only the most inferior among us, those lacking in judgment, follow you. We see no advantage in you over us; in fact, we think you are liars.”
011|028|He replied, “O my people, what if I am backed by clear evidence from my Lord, and He bestowed His mercy upon me, yet you fail to recognize it? Can we impose it upon you against your will?”
011|029|“O my people, I ask no reward from you; my reward is only from Allah. I will not drive away those who have believed. They are going to meet their Lord. But I see that you are a people steeped in ignorance.”
011|030|“O my people, who would support me against Allah if I drove them away? Will you not then mind?”
011|031|“I don’t pretend to hold the treasures of Allah, nor to know the unseen, and I don’t claim to be an angel. I don’t say that Allah won’t bless those you scorn. Allah knows what’s in their hearts. If I were to do so, I would be among the wrongdoers.”
011|032|They replied, “O Noah, you’ve debated with us extensively. Now bring upon us what you threaten us with, if you are truthful.”
011|033|He replied, “Only Allah can bring it upon you, if He wills, and you won’t be able to evade it.”
011|034|“Even if I were to advise you earnestly, my advice wouldn’t benefit you should Allah intend to misguide you. He is your Lord, and to Him, you will be returned.”
011|035|If they accuse you of making it up, say, “If I made it up, then the sin rests upon me, and I am innocent of the sins you commit.”
011|036|It was communicated to Noah, “None of your people will believe, except those who have already believed; therefore, don’t be disheartened by their actions.”
011|037|“And build the Ark under Our observation and Our inspiration, and don’t address Me concerning those who have wronged; they are to be drowned.”
011|038|While he was constructing the Ark, the leaders of his people would mock him whenever they passed by. He would respond, “If you ridicule us, we too will ridicule you, just as you ridicule us.”
011|039|“You will certainly know who will face humiliating punishment and on whom will descend a lasting penalty.”
011|040|When Our decree came to pass, and the volcano erupted, We instructed, “Load onto it a pair of every kind, along with your family—except for the condemned—and the believers.” Yet, only a few believed with him.
011|041|He declared, “Embark! In the name of Allah, its course and anchorage. My Lord is Forgiving and Merciful.”
011|042|And so, it sailed with them amidst waves as mountains. Noah called out to his son, who was separate from them, “O my son, come aboard with us, and don’t be with the unbelievers.”
011|043|He replied, “I will seek refuge on a mountain; it will protect me from the water.” He said, “Today, there is no protection against Allah’s decree, except for those who receive His mercy.” And the waves surged between them, and he was among the drowned.
011|044|Then the command was issued, “O Earth, absorb your water,” and “O Sky, clear away.” The water receded, the event was concluded, and it settled on Mount Judi. And it was declared, “Away with the wrongdoing people!”
011|045|Noah called out to his Lord, and said, “My Lord, my son is of my family. Your promise is true, and You are the most fair of all judges.”
011|046|He responded, “O Noah, he is not of your family; he is of unrighteous conduct. Don’t ask Me about what you don’t know. I admonish you so that you don’t be among the ignorant.”
011|047|He pleaded, “O my Lord, I seek refuge in You from asking You about what I don’t understand. If you don’t forgive me and show me mercy, I will be among the losers.”
011|048|It was said, “O Noah, disembark in peace from Us, and blessings upon you, and upon nations who are with you. But to other nations, we will give enjoyment for a time, then from us will come a severe punishment.”
011|049|These are some of the accounts of the unseen, which We reveal to you. Neither you nor your people knew them before this. So, be patient. The ultimate outcome is for the righteous.
011|050|To Aad, their brother Hud. He said, “O my people, worship Allah; you have no god other than Him. You but invent lies.”
011|051|“O my people, I ask for no compensation from you. My reward is only from the One who originated me. Don’t you understand?”
011|052|“O my people, seek forgiveness from your Lord, and turn to Him in repentance. He will send abundant rain from the sky and will increase your strength, and you should not return to your wrongdoing.”
011|053|They replied, “O Hud, you didn’t provide us clear evidence, and we won’t forsake our gods on your say-so. We don’t believe you.”
011|054|“We can only conclude that some of our gods afflicted you with evil.” He replied, “I call upon Allah to witness, and you to witness, that I’m innocent of what you associate.
011|055|Besides Him. Therefore, all of you plot against me without any delay.
011|056|I place my trust in Allah, my Lord, and your Lord. There is no living being that He doesn’t hold by its forelock. Certainly, my Lord is on a straight path.
011|057|If you turn away, I have conveyed to you the message I was sent with. My Lord will replace you with other people, and you won’t harm Him at all. My Lord is the Guardian over all things.”
011|058|And when Our decree was issued, We delivered Hud and those who had faith with him, by Our mercy, and We saved them from a harsh punishment.
011|059|And that was Aad, who denied their Lord’s signs, disobeyed His messengers, and followed the command of every stubborn tyrant.
011|060|They were followed by a curse in this world and on Resurrection Day. Unquestionably, Aad rejected their Lord. So, away with Aad, the people of Hud.
011|061|To Thamud, their brother Saleh implored, “O my people, worship Allah; you have no deity other than Him. He initiated you from the earth and established you upon it. Seek His forgiveness, and repent to Him. My Lord is Near and Responsive.”
011|062|They responded, “O Saleh, we had high hopes in you before this. Are you prohibiting us from worshiping what our ancestors worshiped? We are deeply uncertain about what you are inviting us to.”
011|063|He replied, “O my people, do you see that I have clear evidence from my Lord, and that He bestowed His mercy upon me? Who could help me against Allah if I were to disobey Him? You would only cause me greater loss.”
011|064|“O my people, this is Allah’s she-camel for you as a symbol. Let her graze on Allah’s earth and don’t harm her, lest a swift punishment overtakes you.”
011|065|Yet, they hamstrung her. He then declared, “Enjoy yourselves in your homes for three days. This is an irrevocable prophecy.”
011|066|When Our decree came to pass, We saved Saleh and those who believed with him, by Our mercy, from the disgrace of that day. Your Lord is the All-Powerful, the Almighty.
011|067|And a loud scream seized the wrongdoers; and they became corpses in their homes.
011|068|As if they had never flourished there. Thamud denied their Lord, so away with Thamud!
011|069|Our messengers came to Abraham with good news. They said, “Peace,” and he answered, “Peace,” and promptly brought a roasted calf.
011|070|But when he saw their hands not reaching for it, he grew suspicious and felt a sense of apprehension. They said, “Fear not; we’ve been sent to the people of Lot.”
011|071|And his wife was standing, and she laughed. Then We gave her the joyful news of Isaac and, following Isaac, Jacob.
011|072|She exclaimed, “Wondrous indeed! Will I give birth while I am an old woman, and this husband of mine is an old man? This is truly a strange thing!”
011|073|They replied, “Are you amazed at Allah’s decree? May Allah’s mercy and blessings be upon you, O family of the house. He is Praiseworthy, Most Glorious.”
011|074|Once Abraham’s fear subsided and the good news reached him, he began to argue with Us for Lot’s people.
011|075|Abraham was compassionate, tender-hearted, and oft-returning.
011|076|“O Abraham, desist from this. Your Lord’s decree has come, and their punishment is irreversible.”
011|077|When Our messengers arrived at Lot’s, he was distressed and felt powerless, unable to protect them. He exclaimed, “This is a difficult day.”
011|078|His people, accustomed to sinful acts, came rushing towards him. He pleaded, “O my people, these are my daughters; they are purer for you. So fear Allah, and don’t disgrace me before my guests. Isn’t there a rational man among you?”
011|079|They responded, “You know well we have no right to your daughters, and you know what we want.”
011|080|He said, “If only I had the strength or could rely on a strong support.”
011|081|They said, “O Lot, we are the messengers of your Lord. They won’t reach you. So travel with your family during the cover of the night, and let none of you look back, except your wife. She will be struck by what strikes them. Their appointed time is the morning—isn’t the morning near?”
011|082|When Our command came, we overturned it completely, and We rained down upon it stones of baked clay.
011|083|Designated by your Lord, and they are never far from the wrongdoers.
011|084|To Midian, their brother Shuaib. He warned, “O my people, worship Allah; you have no deity other than Him. Don’t short-change in measurement and weight. I see you in good condition, but I fear the punishment of a besieging day for you.”
011|085|“O my people, give full measure and weight with justice, don’t cheat people out of their rights, and don’t commit corruption in the land.
011|086|The remainder from Allah is better for you, if you are believers. And I’m not a keeper over you.”
011|087|They responded, “O Shuaib, does your prayer command us to abandon what our ancestors worshiped, or to refrain from doing with our wealth what we please? Indeed, you are the forbearing, the right-guided!”
011|088|He responded, “O my people, did you consider: if I am on clear evidence from my Lord and He provided me with a good provision from Him? I don’t want to be in conflict with you about what I prohibit for you. I only desire reform to the best of my ability. My success is only through Allah. I have placed my trust upon Him, and to Him, I turn.”
011|089|“O my people, let not your opposition to me cause you to suffer the same fate as the people of Noah or Salih. And the people of Lot aren’t far from you.”
011|090|“And seek forgiveness from your Lord, then repent to Him. My Lord is Merciful and Affectionate.”
011|091|They said, “O Shuaib, we don’t grasp much of what you say, and we see you as weak among us. Were it not for your family, we would’ve stoned you, for you have no influence over us.”
011|092|He replied, “Is my family more esteemed to you than Allah, and you’ve pushed Him behind your backs? My Lord is fully aware of what you do.”
011|093|“O my people, do as you will, and I will act. You will then know who will face a humiliating punishment and who is a liar. Wait; I am waiting with you.”
011|094|When Our decree came, We saved Shuaib and those who believed with him, by mercy from Us. And the shriek overtook the wrongdoers, and they became corpses in their homes.
011|095|As if they had never flourished there. So, away with Midian, just as Thamud was done away with.
011|096|We sent Moses with Our signs and a clear mandate.
011|097|To Pharaoh and his nobility, but they followed Pharaoh’s dictates, although Pharoah’s dictates weren’t rational.
011|098|On the Day of Resurrection, he will lead his people into the Fire—a horrendous place to be led to.
011|099|They were pursued by a curse in this life—and on Resurrection Day. What a horrid gift they chose!
011|100|These are some of the stories of the communities that We narrate to you. Some of them are still standing, others are stubble.
011|101|We didn’t wrong them, but they wronged themselves. Their gods, which they invoked besides Allah, availed them nothing when your Lord’s command arrived; they only added to their ruin.
011|102|Such is your Lord’s grip when He seizes the communities while they are immersed in wrongdoing. Indeed, His grip is painful and severe.
011|103|This is a warning for those who fear the punishment of the Hereafter. That’s a Day for which the people will be gathered, and that’s a Day witnessed.
011|104|We only delay it for a determined period.
011|105|When that day arrives, no soul will speak except by His leave. Some will be miserable, while others will be happy.
011|106|As for those who are miserable, they will be in the Fire, where they will sigh and wail.
011|107|They will dwell there for as long as the heavens and the earth last, unless your Lord wills differently. Your Lord accomplishes what He intends.
011|108|As for the happy, they will be in Paradise, residing for as long as the heavens and the earth last, unless your Lord wills differently—a gift without end.
011|109|So don’t be in doubt about what these people worship. They only worship as their ancestors did before. We will give them their full recompense, without any reduction.
011|110|We gave Moses the Scripture, but disputes arose concerning it. If not for a prior decree from your Lord, their disputes would’ve been resolved. Yet they remain deeply uncertain about it.
011|111|Your Lord will fully pay them for their deeds. Surely He is well aware of everything they do.
011|112|So be upright, as you’ve been commanded, and whoever repents with you. And don’t transgress. He sees all that you do.
011|113|And don’t incline towards those who do wrong, lest the Fire should touch you. You would then have no protectors other than Allah, and you wouldn’t be helped.
011|114|Establish the prayer at the two ends of the day, and during parts of the night. Good deeds take away bad deeds. This is a reminder for the mindful.
011|115|And be patient, for surely Allah won’t waste the reward of those who do good.
011|116|If there had been, among the generations before you, people with discernment to ward off corruption on earth—except for the few whom We saved. But the wrongdoers pursued the luxuries they were granted and became transgressors.
011|117|Your Lord would never unjustly destroy communities while their inhabitants work towards reform.
011|118|Had your Lord willed, He could’ve made humanity a single community, but people will continue to differ.
011|119|Except those on whom your Lord has mercy—and for that reason He created them—and the word of your Lord has been fulfilled: “I will fill hell with jinn and humans together.”
011|120|We narrate to you the stories of the messengers to strengthen your heart. In these, the truth has come to you, along with guidance and reminders for the believers.
011|121|Say to those who don’t believe, “Work according to your ability; and we are working.”
011|122|“And wait; we, too, are waiting.”
011|123|To Allah belongs the unseen of the heavens and the earth. All matters are returned to Him. Worship Him and put your trust in Him. Your Lord is not unaware of what you do.
012|001|Alif. Lam. Ra. These are the verses of the clear, enlightening Scripture.
012|002|We revealed it as an Arabic Quran, so that you may understand.
012|003|Through this Quran, we narrate to you the most accurate of stories, although you were previously unaware.
012|004|Joseph said to his father, “O my father, I saw eleven stars, and the sun, and the moon; I saw them prostrating to me.”
012|005|He responded, “O my son, don’t disclose your vision to your brothers, lest they conspire against you. For Satan is man’s outright enemy.
012|006|Your Lord will choose you, teach you the interpretation of narratives, and complete His favor upon you and upon Jacob’s lineage, as He completed it before upon your forefathers, Abraham and Isaac. Your Lord is All-Knowing, All-Wise.
012|007|In the story of Joseph and his brothers, there are signs for those who inquire.
012|008|They grumbled, “Our father is more affectionate to Joseph and his brother than to us, despite our greater number. Our father is clearly misguided.”
012|009|“Kill Joseph, or throw him out to a distant land, so that your father’s attention will be exclusively yours. After which, you can be people of righteousness.”
012|010|One of them suggested, “Don’t kill Joseph, but if you are committed to doing something, throw him into the bottom of a well. Some passing caravan may pick him up.”
012|011|They said, “O our father, why don’t you trust us with Joseph, while we are truly his well-wishers?
012|012|Let him join us tomorrow for play and fun. We will surely protect him.”
012|013|He replied, “It saddens me that you should take him away. I fear a wolf might devour him while you’re negligent of him.”
012|014|They replied, “If a wolf were to devour him while we’re a strong group, then we would be truly losers.”
012|015|So, when they took him and agreed to put him into the bottom of the well, We inspired him: “You will inform them of this deed of theirs when they don’t realize.”
012|016|And they came to their father at night, crying.
012|017|They said, “O our father, we were racing each other and left Joseph with our belongings, and a wolf ate him. But you won’t believe us, even if we are truthful.”
012|018|And they presented his shirt, stained with false blood. He said, “Rather, your souls lured you into something. Yet patience is beautiful. May Allah’s help be sought against what you claim.”
012|019|A passing caravan arrived, and they sent their water drawer. He lowered his bucket and said, “Oh, good news! Here is a boy!” And they concealed him as merchandise, but Allah knew well what they did.
012|020|They sold him for a low price, a few coins, so little did they value him.
012|021|The man from Egypt who bought him said to his wife, “Make his stay comfortable; perhaps he can benefit us, or we might adopt him as a son.” And thus, We established Joseph in the land, and We taught him the interpretation of events. Allah’s command is always executed, but most people don’t know.
012|022|Upon reaching his maturity, We gifted him with wisdom and knowledge. This is how We reward those who do good.
012|023|And she, in whose house he was, sought to seduce him. She closed the doors and said, “Come to me!” He responded, “Allah forbid! He is my master, he treats me well, and the wrongdoers never succeed.”
012|024|She desired him, and he desired her had he not seen his Lord’s evidence. Thus, We diverted evil and indecency from him; he was one of Our devoted servants.
012|025|They raced to the door, and she tore his shirt from behind. They encountered her husband at the door, to whom she cried, “What’s the penalty for someone who intended harm to your family, if not imprisonment or a severe punishment?”
012|026|He said, “It was she who tried to seduce me.” A witness from her family suggested, “If his shirt is torn from the front, then she told the truth, and he is the liar.
012|027|But if his shirt is torn from the back, she has lied, and he is the truthful one.”
012|028|Seeing his shirt torn from the back, he said, “This is one of your cunning tricks. Your scheming is indeed considerable.”
012|029|“Joseph, overlook this. And you, woman, ask forgiveness for your sin. You are certainly in the wrong.”
012|030|Some women in the city said, “The governor’s wife is trying to seduce her servant; she is deeply in love with him. We see her as clearly misguided.”
012|031|Upon hearing their whispers, she invited them over, prepared a feast for them, and gave each of them a knife. She then commanded, “Come out before them!” When they saw him, they marveled at him and cut their hands, exclaiming, “Allah preserve us! This is not a human! This is none other than a noble angel.”
012|032|She said, “This is the one for whom you blamed me for. Yes, I tried to seduce him, but he firmly resisted. If he doesn’t do as I command him, he will be imprisoned and will become humiliated.”
012|033|He said, “My Lord, prison is more desirable to me than what they call me to. Unless You divert their plot from me, I might incline toward them and become of the ignorant.”
012|034|His Lord answered his prayer and averted their scheme from him. He is the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing.
012|035|It seemed good to them, after they had seen the proofs, to imprison him for a time.
012|036|Two young men entered the prison with him. One of them said, “I saw myself pressing wine.” The other said, “I saw myself carrying bread on my head, from which birds were eating. Tell us its interpretation, for we see you as a man of virtue.”
012|037|He replied, “I will inform you of their interpretation before your meal arrives. This is from the knowledge that my Lord has taught me. I have departed from the creed of people who don’t believe in Allah and deny the Hereafter.
012|038|“I adhere to the faith of my forefathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. It’s not for us to associate partners with Allah. This is from Allah’s grace upon us and upon humanity, yet most people are not thankful.”
012|039|“My fellow inmates, are many different lords better, or Allah, the One, the Supreme?
012|040|You are only worshiping names that you and your fathers have invented, without having any authority from Allah. The command rests solely with Allah. He decreed that you worship none but Him. This is the right religion, but most people don’t know.
012|041|O my fellow prisoners, one of you will serve his master wine, while the other will be crucified, and birds will eat from his head. The issue you inquired about has been decided.”
012|042|He said to the one he thought would be released, “Mention me to your master.” But Satan caused him to forget his lord’s mention, so he remained in prison for some years.
012|043|The king said, “I saw seven fat cows being eaten by seven lean ones, and seven green spikes of grain and others dry. O nobles, interpret my vision for me, if you can interpret visions.”
012|044|They replied, “A jumble of dreams, and we don’t know the interpretation of dreams.”
012|045|Then the one of the two who was saved, remembered after a period of time, and said, “I will tell you its interpretation, so send me.”
012|046|“Joseph, O truthful one, explain to us seven fat cows being eaten by seven lean ones, and seven green spikes of grain and others dry, that I may return to the people, so they may know.”
012|047|He said, “You will cultivate for seven consecutive years, and what you harvest, leave it in its spikes, except for a little which you will eat.”
012|048|“Then will follow seven difficult years which will consume what you saved for them, except for a little of what you have stored.”
012|049|“Then, after that, there will come a year in which the people will receive abundant rain and will press.”
012|050|The king said, “Bring him to me!” And when the messenger came to him, he said, “Return to your master and ask him about the women who cut their hands. My Lord is fully aware of their scheming.”
012|051|Then, when they were asked, “What was your aim when you tried to seduce Joseph, “What was your motive when you tried to seduce Joseph?” They responded, “Allah forbid! We know of no ill conduct on his part.” The governor’s wife then confessed, “Now the truth has now emerged; it was I who sought to seduce him, and he is truthful.”
012|052|“This is so he may know that I didn’t betray him in his absence, and that Allah doesn’t guide the scheming of the betrayers.”
012|053|“I don’t claim innocence for myself. The soul is predisposed to evil, except those my Lord bestows mercy upon. My Lord is Forgiving and Merciful.”
012|054|The king said, “Bring him to me. I will appoint him exclusively for myself.” When he talked to him, he said, “Today, you are with us established and trusted.”
012|055|He proposed, “Appoint me over the land’s storehouses; I am a reliable and knowledgeable custodian.”
012|056|Thus, We established Joseph in the land, granting him the freedom to reside wherever he desired. We bestow Our mercy upon whom We will, and We never let the reward of the righteous be lost.
012|057|But, the reward of the Hereafter is better for those who believe and maintain righteousness.
012|058|Joseph’s brothers came, and he recognized them when they arrived, but they didn’t recognize him.
012|059|While preparing their supplies, he said, “Bring me your brother from your father’s side. Don’t you see that I give full measure and am the best of hosts?”
012|060|“If you don’t bring him to me, you will receive no supplies from me, and you won’t be permitted near me.”
012|061|They replied, “We will convince his father to send him with us, and we will surely do it.”
012|062|He then instructed his servants, “Place their money back into their saddlebags, so they may recognize it when they return to their family, that they might return.”
012|063|Upon their return to their father, they pleaded, “Father, we will be denied further supplies unless you send our brother with us. Indeed, we are his protectors.”
012|064|He replied, “Shall I entrust him to you, when I had previously entrusted his brother to you? But Allah is the best guardian, and He is the most merciful of the merciful.”
012|065|When they opened their bags, they discovered their money had been restored to them. They exclaimed, “Father, what more could we desire? This is our money, returned to us in full. Now, we can give food to our family, safeguard our brother, and acquire an additional load of provisions. That extra load is easily obtainable for us.”
012|066|He responded, “I won’t send him with you, until you swear by Allah, that you will bring him back to me, unless you become surrounded.” And when they gave him their promise, he said, “Allah is the overseer of what we say.”
012|067|He said, “My sons, don’t enter from one gate, but enter from different gates. I cannot avail you against Allah at all. The decree belongs solely to Allah. I trust in Him, and upon Him, those who trust should trust.”
012|068|Despite entering as their father had instructed them, it didn’t alter Allah’s plan. But it was a need in Jacob’s soul. He was endowed with knowledge from what We had taught him, but most people don’t know.
012|069|When they presented themselves to Joseph, he drew his brother close to him, and he whispered, “I am your brother, so don’t be disheartened by their behavior.”
012|070|As he prepared their provisions, he discreetly placed the goblet in his brother’s saddlebag. Then a herald shouted, “O people of the caravan! You are surely thieves!”
012|071|Upon being summoned, they were asked, “What have you lost?”
012|072|“We lost the king’s goblet,” they replied. “Whoever brings it will receive a camel-load, and I guarantee it.”
012|073|They responded, “By Allah, you surely know that we didn’t come to cause disorder in the land, and we aren’t thieves.”
012|074|They were further asked, “What should be his penalty if you are proven to be lying?”
012|075|They replied, “His penalty—if it’s found in his bag—will be that he will become yours. This is how we penalize the wrongdoers.”
012|076|He began with their bags before his brother’s, and eventually, he retrieved it from his brother’s bag. Thus did We devise a plan for Joseph. He couldn’t have detained his brother under the king’s law, unless Allah had so willed. We raise in ranks whom We will, and above every possessor of knowledge, there is One more knowledgeable.
012|077|They exclaimed, “If he has stolen, a brother of his committed theft before.” But Joseph kept this to himself and didn’t disclose it to them. He said, “You’re in a worse position, and Allah knows best what you describe.”
012|078|They pleaded, “O Noble one, he has an elderly father, so take one of us in his place. We see you as a good-doer.”
012|079|He replied, “Allah forbid that we should take anyone but him with whom we found our property. Otherwise, we would be unjust.”
012|080|When they despaired of him, they withdrew to confer privately. Their eldest said, “Don’t you remember that your father received a solemn pledge from you before Allah, and how you were previously lax towards Joseph? I won’t leave this land until my father permits me, or Allah decides for me. He is the best of judges.”
012|081|“Go back to your father, and say, ‘O our father, your son committed theft, and we testify only to what we know, and we couldn’t guard against the unforeseen.’”
012|082|“Also, ask about the town where we’ve been, the caravan in which we returned; we are being truthful.”
012|083|He said, “Rather, your souls lured you to something. Yet, patience is beautiful. Perhaps Allah will bring them all back to me. He is the All-Knowing, the All-Wise.”
012|084|Then he turned away from them, lamenting, “Oh, my grief for Joseph!” His eyes turned white from grief, and he became depressed.
012|085|They exclaimed, “By Allah, you won’t stop remembering Joseph until you ruin your health, or until you pass away.”
012|086|He replied, “I only express my distress and anguish to Allah, and I know from Allah what you don’t know.”
012|087|“O my sons, go and search for Joseph and his brother, and never despair of Allah’s mercy. None despairs of Allah’s mercy except the disbelieving people.”
012|088|Upon entering his presence, they pleaded, “Your Excellency, adversity has touched us and our family, and we brought only a paltry sum. Please, give us full measure and be charitable to us. Truly, Allah rewards the charitable.”
012|089|He asked, “Do you remember what you did with Joseph and his brother in your ignorance?”
012|090|They exclaimed, “Could you possibly be Joseph?” He confirmed, “I am Joseph, and this is my brother. Allah has indeed been gracious to us. Whoever is righteous and patient—Allah never wastes the reward of the good-doers.”
012|091|They admitted, “By Allah, truly Allah has preferred you over us, and we were indeed at fault.”
012|092|He responded, “There will be no blame on you today. May Allah forgive you, for He is the Most Merciful of the merciful.”
012|093|“Take my shirt, and lay it over my father’s face, and he will regain his sight. And bring your entire family to me.”
012|094|As the caravan departed, their father said, “I can sense the scent of Joseph, even though you think I’m senile.”
012|095|They replied, “By Allah, you are still in your old delusions.”
012|096|When the bearer of good news arrived, he placed it on his face, and he regained his sight. He said, “Didn’t I tell you that I know from Allah what you don’t know?”
012|097|They pleaded, “O our father, seek forgiveness for our transgressions; we were indeed in the wrong.”
012|098|He replied, “I will seek your forgiveness from my Lord. He is the Forgiving, the Merciful.”
012|099|When they entered Joseph’s presence, he embraced his parents and said, “Enter Egypt, Allah willing, in peace and safety.”
012|100|He then elevated his parents upon the throne, and they fell down in prostration to him. He said, “O my father, this fulfills my previous vision; my Lord made it come true. He has been good to me, releasing me from prison and bringing you from the desert after Satan had stirred up strife between me and my brothers. My Lord is Most Kind to whom He wills. He is the All-Knowing, the All-Wise.”
012|101|“My Lord, You’ve granted me some authority and taught me some interpretation of events—the Originator of the heavens and the earth. You’re my Protector in this world and the Hereafter. Receive my soul in submission, and unite me with the righteous.”
012|102|These are some of the narratives that We reveal to you. You weren’t present with them when they conspired and agreed on their plan.
012|103|Despite your eagerness, most people aren’t believers.
012|104|You ask for no compensation for it. It is merely a reminder to all of humanity.
012|105|How many signs in the heavens and on earth do they pass by, yet they turn away from them?
012|106|Most of them don’t believe in Allah without associating others with Him.
012|107|Are they confident that an encompassing calamity from Allah won’t come upon them, or that the Hour won’t come upon them suddenly while they don’t realize?
012|108|Say, “This is my way: I call to Allah with insight—I and those who follow me. Praise be to Allah, and I am not among the polytheists.”
012|109|We sent none before you, except men whom We inspired, chosen from among the people of the towns. Didn’t they travel through the earth and observe the aftermath of those who preceded them? The home of the Hereafter is better for the righteous. Will you not, then, use reason?
012|110|When the messengers despaired, and thought that they were denied, Our help came to them. We save whom We will, and Our wrath can’t be repelled from the criminal people.
012|111|In their stories, there are lessons for those of understanding. It is not an invented tale, but a confirmation of what preceded it, a detailed explanation of everything, and guidance and mercy for those who believe.
013|001|Alif, Lam, Meem, Ra. These are the verses of the Scripture. What was revealed to you from your Lord is the truth, yet most people don’t believe.
013|002|It is Allah who raised the skies without any pillars you can see, then He established Himself upon the Throne. He subjected the sun and the moon, each running for a set term. He conducts all affairs and explains the signs, so that you may be certain of meeting your Lord.
013|003|It is He who spread the earth, placed mountains and rivers on it, and of every fruit, He made therein two mates. He covers the night with the day. In that are signs for people who give thought.
013|004|On earth are adjacent terrains, vineyards, fields of crops, and date palms, from shared or separate roots, irrigated with the same water. We make some taste better than others. In this are signs for people who reason.
013|005|If you’re amazed, even amazing is their statement: “When we are dust, will we be created anew?” These are the ones who denied their Lord. They will have shackles around their necks. They will be the inhabitants of the Fire, dwelling therein forever.
013|006|They eagerly want you to bring about bad before good, even though there were instances before them. Your Lord is abundant in forgiveness for people, despite their wrongdoings, and yet, your Lord is severe in retribution.
013|007|Those who disbelieve ask, “Why has no miracle been sent down to him from his Lord?” You are but a warner; and for every people, there is a guide.
013|008|Allah knows what every female carries, and what the wombs diminish or increase. Everything with Him is of due proportion.
013|009|He is the Knower of the unseen and the witnessed, the Grand, the Most High.
013|010|It’s the same whether one of you conceals his speech or declares it openly, and whether one hides in the night or goes out freely in the day.
013|011|Guardians are stationed before and behind him, safeguarding him by Allah’s command. Allah won’t change people’s condition until they change what’s within themselves. If Allah intends for a people ill, there is no repelling it, and they have no defender or supporter besides Him.
013|012|It is He who shows you lightning, causing fear and hope, and produces the heavy clouds.
013|013|The thunder glorifies His praise, as do the angels, out of awe for Him. He releases thunderbolts and strikes with them whom He wills. Yet they argue about Allah, despite Him being tremendous in might and authority.
013|014|To Him is the call of truth. Those they pray to besides Him can’t respond to them with a thing, except like one who reaches his hand out to the water, only for it never to reach his mouth. The prayers of the unbelievers are but in vain.
013|015|To Allah do all those in the heavens and the earth bow down, willingly or unwillingly, and their shadows in the mornings and the afternoons.
013|016|Ask, “Who is the Lord of the heavens and the earth?” Answer, “Allah.” Then ask, “Have you taken other than Him allies, who can neither benefit nor harm themselves?” Say, “Are the blind and the sighted equal? Or are darkness and light alike? Or have they ascribed partners to Allah who supposedly created creations similar to His, so that creation appeared similar to them?” Say, “Allah is the Creator of everything, He is the One, the Overpowering.”
013|017|He sends down water from the sky, and valleys flow according to their capacity. The torrent carries overflowing foam, akin to what emerges from metals when melted for crafting jewelry and tools. Thus, Allah illustrates truth and falsehood. The foam dissipates, but what benefits humanity remains on earth. Thus, Allah presents parables.
013|018|For those who respond to their Lord is the best. But for those who don’t respond to Him—even if they possessed everything on earth, and an equivalent besides, they would offer it to ransom themselves. These will face a terrible reckoning, and their housing will be Hell—a dreadful dwelling.
013|019|Is one who knows that what has been revealed to you from your Lord is the truth like the one who is blind? Only people of understanding will remember.
013|020|Those who honor the covenant of Allah and don’t break the contract.
013|021|And those who join what Allah has commanded to be joined, revere their Lord, and dread the dire reckoning.
013|022|Those who patiently seek their Lord’s presence, pray regularly, spend out of what We’ve provided for them—secretly and openly—and repel evil with good, for them is the ultimate home.
013|023|The Gardens of Eden, which they will enter, along with the righteous among their parents, spouses, and offspring. Angels will enter upon them from every gate.
013|024|“Peace be upon you due to your patience. How wonderful is the final home!”
013|025|And those who break the covenant of Allah after its ratification, sever what Allah has commanded to be joined, and spread corruption on earth, upon them is the curse, and they will have a wretched home.
013|026|Allah expands the provision for whom He wills and measures it. They rejoice in the worldly life, while the worldly life, compared to the Hereafter, is but temporary enjoyment.
013|027|The disbelievers argue, “Why has a sign not been sent down upon him from his Lord?” Answer, “Allah leads astray whom He wills, and He guides to Himself those who turn back.”
013|028|Those who believe and whose hearts find tranquility in the remembrance of Allah—for indeed, it is through the remembrance of Allah that hearts find peace.
013|029|Those who believe and do righteous deeds—blessedness is theirs and a beautiful return.
013|030|We sent you amongst a nation, as We sent to nations before you, to convey to them what We revealed to you. Yet they deny the Most Merciful. Say, “He is my Lord; there is no god but Him. On Him I have relied, and to Him is my return.”
013|031|And even if there was a Quran that could move mountains, split the earth, or make the dead speak, the ultimate authority would still belong to Allah. Didn’t those who believed give up, realizing that if Allah so willed, He could guide all of humanity? The unbelievers will continue to suffer calamities due to what they did, or they fall near their homes, until Allah’s promise is fulfilled. Allah does not fail in His promise.
013|032|Messengers before you were also ridiculed, but I allowed the unbelievers to carry on, only to seize them—how severe was My retribution!
013|033|Who is He, the One observing over every soul and its actions? And yet they attribute partners to Allah. Say, “Name them! Or are you informing Him of something He doesn’t know on Earth? Or is it mere outward speech?” Their plots seem appealing to the unbelievers, and they are blocked from the path. Whomever Allah leads astray, there is no guide for him.
013|034|They will have suffering in this worldly life, and the suffering of the hereafter is harsher, and they will have no protector from Allah.
013|035|The example of Paradise promised to the righteous is where rivers flow beneath. Its produce and shade are everlasting. Such is the end result for the righteous, while the end result for unbelievers is the Fire.
013|036|Those whom We’ve given the scripture rejoice in what was revealed to You. But some factions deny parts of it. Say, “I am commanded to worship Allah alone and not associate anything with Him. To Him, I call, and to Him, is my return.”
013|037|And thus, We’ve revealed it as a law in Arabic. If you should follow their desires after what has come to you of knowledge, there will be no protector or ally for you against Allah.
013|038|We sent messengers before you, and We assigned to them wives and descendants. It’s not for a messenger to come with a sign except by Allah’s permission. For every era, there is a scripture.
013|039|Allah eliminates what He wills or confirms it, and with Him is the Source Scripture.
013|040|Whether We show you some of what We promised them, or We end your life, you have to convey, and judgment is Ours.
013|041|Don’t they see that We are reducing the land from its borders? Allah decrees. None can overturn His decision. And He is swift in accounting.
013|042|Those before them plotted, but all planning belongs to Allah. He knows what every soul earns. The unbelievers will find out who gets the ultimate Home.
013|043|The unbelievers say, “You are not a Messenger.” Respond, “Allah suffices as a witness between me and you, along with anyone who has knowledge of the Scripture.”
014|001|Alif. Lam. Ra. This is a Scripture that We revealed to you, to guide people from darkness into light, by the permission of their Lord, towards the path of the Almighty, the Praiseworthy.
014|002|Allah, to whom belongs everything in the heavens and on the earth. Woe unto the unbelievers, for a severe punishment awaits them.
014|003|Those who prefer the worldly life over the Hereafter, who deter others from Allah’s path, and seek to bend it. These are far astray.
014|004|We sent every messenger in the language of his people, to clarify things for them. Allah leaves astray whom He wills, and He guides whom He wills. He is the All-Wise, the All-Powerful.
014|005|We sent Moses with Our signs: “Lead your people from darkness into light, and remind them of Allah’s days.” In this are signs for every patient, thankful person.
014|006|Moses told his people, “Remember Allah’s favor upon you, when He saved you from Pharaoh’s people, who imposed terrible suffering upon you, slaughtering your sons and sparing your daughters. That was a grave test from your Lord.”
014|007|Your Lord declared, “If you are grateful, I will surely increase you; but if you are ungrateful, then My punishment is severe.”
014|008|Moses said, ”Even if you, along with everyone on earth, are ungrateful, Allah is still Self-Sufficient, Praiseworthy.”
014|009|Didn’t the stories of those before you reach you—the people of Noah, Aad, Thamud, and those after them? None knows them except Allah. Their messengers came to them with clear signs, but they tried to muzzle them, saying, “We disbelieve in what you’ve been sent with, and we are in serious doubt about what you invite us to.”
014|010|Their messengers responded, “Is there doubt about Allah, the Originator of the heavens and the earth? He invites you to forgive your sins and delay you to a specified time.” They replied, “You are but humans like us, wanting to turn us away from what our ancestors worshiped. So, bring us clear evidence.”
014|011|Their messengers replied, “Indeed, we are only humans like you, yet Allah favors whom He wills of His servants. It’s not up to us to bring you proof except by Allah’s permission. In Allah, should the believers put their trust.”
014|012|“Why shouldn’t we trust Allah when He has guided us along our paths? We will patiently endure what you inflict upon us. Let those who trust place their trust in Allah.”
014|013|The unbelievers told their messengers, “We will expel you from our land, unless you return to our religion.” Then their Lord revealed to them, “Most certainly, We will destroy the wrongdoers.”
014|014|“And after them, We will settle you in the land. This is for those who fear My position and heed My warnings.”
014|015|They sought victory, and every stubborn tyrant was disappointed.
014|016|In front of him is Hell, and he will be given purulent water to drink.
014|017|He will gulp it, yet he won’t swallow it. Death will come at him from every direction, yet he won’t die. And ahead of him, there is unrelenting torment.
014|018|Those who deny their Lord, their works are like ashes, swept away by a fierce wind on a stormy day. They have no control over anything they’ve earned. This is the far straying.
014|019|Don’t you see how Allah created the heavens and the earth in truth? If He wills, He can remove you and produce a new creation.
014|020|And this is not difficult for Allah.
014|021|They will all appear before Allah. The weak will plead with the arrogant, “We were your followers; can you spare us from Allah’s punishment?” They will respond, “Had Allah guided us, we would’ve guided you. Whether we express impatience or endure patiently, there’s no escape for us.”
014|022|When judgment is passed, Satan will say, “Allah gave you a truthful promise, and I made you promises too, but I failed you. I had no authority over you, except that I invited you, and you responded to me. So, don’t blame me, but blame yourselves. I can’t answer your cries, nor can you answer mine. I disavow what you previously associated me with. For the wrongdoers, there is a severe punishment.”
014|023|Those who believed and worked righteousness will be admitted into Gardens beneath which rivers flow, abiding therein by the permission of their Lord, and their greeting therein will be “Peace.”
014|024|Don’t you see how Allah presents a parable? A good word is like a good tree: its roots are firmly anchored, and its branches extend towards the sky.
014|025|It produces its fruit every season by the permission of its Lord. Allah presents such analogies to people so they may reflect.
014|026|The analogy of a wicked word is like a rotten tree, uprooted from the ground, lacking stability.
014|027|Allah anchors the believers with the firm word, in this life and the Hereafter. Allah makes the wrongdoers go astray, for Allah does what He wills.
014|028|Haven’t you considered those who exchanged Allah’s favor for disbelief and brought their people to ruins?
014|029|Hell, where they will burn; a terrible dwelling!
014|030|They set up equals to Allah, intending to mislead others from His path. Say, “Enjoy your brief pleasures; your final destination is the Fire.”
014|031|Tell My servants who have believed to establish their prayers and to give from what We provide for them, secretly and openly, before the arrival of a day in which there will be neither bargaining nor befriending.
014|032|It is Allah who created the heavens and the earth and sends down rain from the sky, thereby producing fruits for your sustenance. And He subjected to you the ships to sail through the sea by His command, and He subjected the rivers to you.
014|033|Also, He subjected to you the sun and the moon, both diligently pursuing their courses, and He subjected the night and the day to you.
014|034|He gave you something of all that you requested. If you were to count Allah’s blessings, you could never enumerate them. Man is given to wrongdoing and ingratitude.
014|035|And when Abraham said, “My Lord, make this city safe, and keep me and my offspring from worshiping idols.”
014|036|“My Lord, they have misled many among the people. So whoever follows me, then he is of me; and whoever disobeys me, then You are Forgiving and Merciful.”
014|037|“Our Lord, I have settled some of my descendants in an uncultivated valley, near Your Sacred House, so they may establish prayer. Our Lord, make people’s hearts incline towards them, and provide them with fruits, so they may be thankful.”
014|038|“Our Lord, You know what we conceal and what we declare. And nothing is hidden from Allah on the earth or in the heavens.”
014|039|“Praise be to Allah, Who, even in my old age, granted me Ishmael and Isaac. My Lord is the Hearer of prayers.”
014|040|“My Lord, make me an establisher of prayer, and of my descendants. Our Lord, and accept my supplication.”
014|041|“Our Lord, forgive me, my parents, and the believers on the Day when judgment occurs.”
014|042|Never think that Allah is unaware of what the wrongdoers do. He only delays them to a Day when the eyes transfix.
014|043|Rushing forward, their heads upraised, their gaze unflinching, their hearts void.
014|044|Warn the people of the Day when the punishment will befall them, and the wrongdoers will say, “Our Lord, delay us for a little while, and we will answer Your call and follow the messengers.” But didn’t you swear before that there will be no end for you?
014|045|You inhabited the homes of those who wronged themselves, and it became clear to you how We treated them. And We have illustrated for you the examples.
014|046|They devised their plan, and their plan is known to Allah, even if their plan were to eliminate mountains.
014|047|Never think that Allah will fail in His promise to His messengers. Allah is Mighty, Owner of Retribution.
014|048|On the Day when the earth will be changed to another earth, and the heavens as well, and they will appear before Allah, the One, the Dominant.
014|049|On that Day, you will see the criminals bound in chains.
014|050|Their garments made of tar, and the flames covering their faces.
014|051|So that Allah may recompense every soul for what it has earned. Allah is swift in accounting.
014|052|This is a proclamation for humankind, that they may be warned thereby, and that they may know that He is One God, and so that those possessed of understanding may take heed.
015|001|Alif. Lam. Ra. These are the verses of the Scripture—a Quran that explains with clarity.
015|002|Perhaps those who disbelieve would wish that they had been Submitters.
015|003|Let them eat, enjoy, and let false hope distract them. Soon they will know.
015|004|We’ve never destroyed a community that didn’t have a known term.
015|005|No community can accelerate or postpone its appointed time.
015|006|They said, “O you to whom the reminder was revealed, you are surely deranged.”
015|007|“Why don’t you bring us the angels, if you are truthful?”
015|008|We only send down angels in truth, and they wouldn’t be restrained.
015|009|Surely, it is We who revealed the Message, and it is We who will preserve it.
015|010|We sent messengers before you to the ancient communities.
015|011|Yet every messenger that came to them was ridiculed.
015|012|Thus, We subtly instill it into the hearts of the criminals.
015|013|They will not have faith in it, though the ways of the ancients have passed away.
015|014|Even if we were to open up a gate into heaven for them, and they kept ascending through it.
015|015|They would still say, “Our eyes are tricked; we are under a spell.”
015|016|We positioned constellations in the sky, and We beautified it for the observers.
015|017|And We protected it from every accursed devil.
015|018|Except those who stealthily eavesdrop; a piercing flame pursues them.
015|019|And We spread the earth, and placed stabilizers upon it, and fostered balanced growth within it.
015|020|We made it a habitat for you and for those you don’t sustain.
015|021|There is not a thing but that with Us are its storehouses, and We dispense it in known measure.
015|022|We send winds as pollinators, and We bring down water from the sky, providing you with it to drink. You don’t possess its reserves.
015|023|It is We who give life and cause death, and We are the Inheritors.
015|024|We know those among you who advance, and we know those who lag behind.
015|025|Your Lord will gather them all; He is All-Wise, All-Knowing.
015|026|We created man from clay, from molded mud.
015|027|Beforehand, We created the jinn from scorching fire.
015|028|Your Lord told the angels, “I am creating a human being from clay, from molded mud.”
015|029|“Once I have shaped him and breathed into him of My Spirit, fall in prostration before him.”
015|030|So, all the angels prostrated themselves collectively.
015|031|Except for Iblis, he refused to be among those who prostrated.
015|032|He asked, “O Iblis, what prevented you from prostrating with those who prostrated?”
015|033|He replied, “I will not prostrate to a human You created from clay, from molded mud.”
015|034|He said, “Depart from here, for you are a banished outcast.
015|035|And the curse will be upon you until Judgment Day.”
015|036|He pleaded, “My Lord, delay me until the Day they’re resurrected.”
015|037|He responded, “You are granted delay.
015|038|Until the appointed day and time.”
015|039|“Lord,” he declared, “since you have lured me away, I will glamorize for them on earth, and I will lure them all away.”
015|040|Except for Your chosen servants among them.”
015|041|He replied, “This is a straight path to Me.
015|042|You have no sway over My devotees, except those who follow you of the deviators.
015|043|And hell is promised to them all.
015|044|It has seven gates. For every gate, there is a designated portion of them.
015|045|The righteous will be in gardens and springs.”
015|046|“Enter it in peace, securely.”
015|047|We will remove from their hearts all ill feelings; they will be brethren, lounging on couches, facing one another.
015|048|No fatigue will touch them there, nor will they ever be asked to leave.
015|049|Inform My beings that I am the Forgiving, the Merciful.
015|050|And that My punishment is the painful punishment.
015|051|Relate to them the story of Abraham’s guests.
015|052|When they entered his presence, they greeted him with “Peace.” He responded, “We are uneasy about you.”
015|053|They reassured him, “Fear not; we bring you good news of a wise son.”
015|054|He asked, “How can you bring such news, given my advanced age? So what gives you this good news?”
015|055|They replied, “Indeed, we bring you truthful news, so don’t lose hope.”
015|056|He said, “None despairs of his Lord’s mercy except those who have strayed.”
015|057|He then inquired, “What’s your mission, O messengers?”
015|058|They replied, “We’ve been sent to a people steeped in sin.”
015|059|“Except for Lot’s family—we will rescue them all.”
015|060|“Except for his wife.” We had decreed that she would be among those left behind.
015|061|When the messengers came to Lot’s family.
015|062|He said, “You are a people unknown to me.”
015|063|They replied, “We brought you what they’ve been doubting.”
015|064|“We’ve brought you the truth, and indeed, we are truthful.”
015|065|“Leave with your family during the cover of night, and follow their footsteps. Let none of you look back, and proceed as instructed.”
015|066|We informed him of this mandate: “The last remnants of these people will be cut off by morning.”
015|067|And the people of the city came rejoicing.
015|068|He pleaded, “These are my guests, so don’t dishonor me.”
015|069|“And fear Allah, and don’t embarrass me.”
015|070|They replied, “Didn’t we forbid you from strangers?”
015|071|He responded, “These are my daughters, if you must act.”
015|072|By your life, they were in their intoxication, blundering.
015|073|Then, the blast seized them at sunrise.
015|074|We turned it upside down, and We rained upon them stones of baked clay.
015|075|In this, there are signs for those who discern.
015|076|It was located on an established road.
015|077|In that is a sign for the believers.
015|078|The inhabitants of the wooded valley were also wrongdoers.
015|079|So, We exacted retribution from them. Both were visible from the main road.
015|080|Similarly, the inhabitants of the Rocky Tract rejected the messengers.
015|081|We presented them with Our signs, but they turned away from them.
015|082|They used to carve secure homes into the mountains.
015|083|Yet, the sudden blast seized them at dawn.
015|084|All that they had acquired availed them not.
015|085|We created the heavens and the earth, and what lies between them, with truth. The Hour is certainly coming, so overlook with beautiful forgiveness.
015|086|Surely your Lord, He is the Creator, the All-Knowing.
015|087|We’ve given you seven pairs, and the Grand Quran.
015|088|Don’t extend your eyes towards what We gave certain classes of them to enjoy, and don’t grieve over them. Instead, show kindness to the believers.
015|089|Say, “I am the clear warner.”
015|090|Just as We had revealed to the separatists.
015|091|Those who made the Quran into shreds.
015|092|By your Lord, We will surely interrogate them all.
015|093|About what they used to do.
015|094|So proclaim what you’re commanded, and turn away from the idolaters.
015|095|We are sufficient for you against the mockers.
015|096|Those who set up another deity with Allah—they will find out.
015|097|We know that what they say causes you distress.
015|098|So, glorify your Lord with praise, and be of the ones who bow down.
015|099|And worship your Lord until certainty comes to you.
016|001|The decree of Allah has come, so don’t rush it. He is Exalted, far beyond what they associate with Him.
016|002|He sends down the angels with the spirit from His command, upon whom He wills of His servants, saying, “Warn that there is no god but Me, so fear Me.”
016|003|He created the heavens and the earth with truth. He is far above what they associate with Him.
016|004|He created man from a drop, and behold, he becomes a clear disputant.
016|005|And the livestock, He created them for you. In them, there is warmth and other benefits. And from them, you eat.
016|006|And there is beauty in them for you when you herd them in the evening and drive them out to graze in the morning.
016|007|They transport your loads to regions you couldn’t reach without considerable hardship. Your Lord is Kind and Merciful.
016|008|And horses, mules, and donkeys for you to ride and as adornment. And He creates what you don’t know.
016|009|Upon Allah is the direction of the way, though some of them are crooked. If He willed, He could’ve guided you all.
016|010|It is He who sends down rain from the sky, from it you drink, and from it grows vegetation for your livestock to eat.
016|011|He produces crops, olives, date palms, grapes, and all kinds of fruits for you. In this, there is a sign for people who reflect.
016|012|He has subdued for you the night and the day. The sun, the moon, and the stars, are subservient by His command. In that are signs for people who reason.
016|013|Everything He scattered for you on earth is of diverse colors. In this, there is a sign for those who notice.
016|014|It is He who made the sea subservient for you, that you may eat from it tender meat and extract ornaments to wear. You see ships plowing through it, so you may seek His bounty and give thanks.
016|015|He set up mountains on the earth so it wouldn’t shake with you, and rivers and roads, so you may be guided.
016|016|And landmarks; and by the stars, they navigate.
016|017|Can He who creates be like the one who does not create? Will you not reflect?
016|018|If you try to count Allah’s favors, you can never enumerate them. Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
016|019|Allah knows what you conceal and what you reveal.
016|020|Those they call upon besides Allah create nothing, but are themselves created.
016|021|They are dead, not alive, and they don’t perceive when they’ll be resurrected.
016|022|Your God is one God. As for those who don’t believe in the Hereafter—their hearts are denying, and they are arrogant.
016|023|Allah knows what they conceal and what they reveal. He doesn’t love the arrogant.
016|024|When asked, “What did your Lord reveal?” They respond, “Myths of the ancients.”
016|025|On Resurrection Day, they will bear their burdens in full, along with some of the burdens of those they misled without knowledge. Alas, evil is what they bear!
016|026|Those before them also plotted, but Allah undermined their foundations, and the roof collapsed upon them from above. The punishment came upon them from where they didn’t perceive.
016|027|Then, on the Day of Resurrection, He will humiliate them and question, “Where are My ‘partners’ concerning whom you used to dispute?” Those knowledgeable will say, “Today, disgrace and misery are upon the unbelievers.”
016|028|Those whose souls the angels take while they wronged themselves, will offer their submission: “We were not doing any wrong!”. Yet, Allah has full knowledge of what you used to do.
016|029|So, enter the gates of Hell, to reside therein eternally. Horrible is the residence for the arrogant!
016|030|The righteous will be asked, “What did your Lord reveal?” They will reply, “The best.” For those who do good in this life, there is goodness, and the home of the Hereafter is even better. How wonderful is the residence of the righteous!
016|031|They will enter the Gardens of Eternity, beneath which rivers flow. Therein, they will have all that they wish for. Thus does Allah reward the righteous.
016|032|When the angels receive the souls of the good-natured, they will say, “Peace be upon you. Enter Paradise due to your deeds.”
016|033|Are they waiting for the angels to come to them, or for your Lord’s command to arrive? This is what those before them did. Allah didn’t wrong them, but they wronged themselves.
016|034|The consequences of their deeds overtook them, and the very things they used to ridicule engulfed them.
016|035|Those who associate others argue, “If Allah had willed, we wouldn’t have worshiped anything other than Him, neither us nor our ancestors, nor would we have prohibited anything without His sanction.” Those before them did the same. Are the messengers’ duty anything other than the clear conveyance of the message?
016|036|We sent a messenger to every community, saying, “Worship Allah and shun false gods.” Among them were those whom Allah guided, while others deserved misguidance. So, travel through the earth and observe the end of the deniers.
016|037|Despite your concern for their guidance, Allah doesn’t guide those He allows to go astray, and they will have no helpers.
016|038|They swear their strongest oaths by Allah that Allah won’t resurrect the dead. Yet, it’s absolutely a true promise from Him, though most people don’t know.
016|039|This serves to clarify the matters they dispute and make those who disbelieve realize that they were liars.
016|040|When We decree something, We only say to it, “Be,” and it is.
016|041|Those who emigrate for the sake of Allah after being oppressed, We will establish them in this world in a favorable place. But the reward of the Hereafter is even greater, if only they knew.
016|042|Those who endure patiently and place their trust in their Lord.
016|043|We sent no messengers before you except men whom We inspired. If you don’t know, ask those who possess knowledge.
016|044|To you, We sent down the Message, providing clear instructions and sacred scriptures, so that you may clarify to people what was revealed to them, and that they may reflect.
016|045|Can those who devise evil plans really feel secure that Allah won’t cause the earth to swallow them, or that the punishment won’t come upon them whence they perceive not?
016|046|Or that He won’t catch them amidst their everyday activities, from which they can’t escape?
016|047|Or that He won’t take them in a state of fear? Your Lord is Kind and Merciful.
016|048|Don’t they see everything Allah created, how their shadows shift from the right and the left, all humbly submitting to Allah?
016|049|To Allah prostrates whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on earth: every living creature, and the angels, and with no pride.
016|050|They fear their Lord above them and do what they’re commanded.
016|051|Allah said, “Don’t take two gods. He is the One and Only Allah. Therefore, revere only Me.”
016|052|Everything in the heavens and on earth is His, and unto Him is religion due perpetually. Would you fear anyone other than Allah?
016|053|Whatever good comes to you, it’s from Allah. Yet when harm touches you, it’s unto Him that you cry out in distress.
016|054|Yet, when He alleviates your suffering, some of you associate others with their Lord.
016|055|Such ingratitude for what We’ve given them! Enjoy yourselves; soon, you will come to know.
016|056|And they allocate a share of what We’ve provided them to what they don’t know. Certainly, by Allah, you will be questioned about your fabrications.
016|057|And they attribute to Allah daughters, exalted is He; while for themselves, what they desire.
016|058|When one of them is given news of a female, his face darkens, he becomes choked with silent grief.
016|059|He hides from people due to the bad news he received. Should he keep her despite the dishonor, or bury her in the dust? What a poor decision they make!
016|060|Those who don’t believe in the Hereafter set a terrible example, while Allah sets the highest standard. He is the Mighty, the Wise.
016|061|If Allah were to punish people for their wrongdoings, He wouldn’t leave a living creature on it. However, He defers them to an appointed term. When their time arrives, they can neither delay nor hasten it by an hour.
016|062|They attribute to Allah what they hate, and their tongues falsely claim that all good things are theirs. No doubt, the Fire is their destiny, and they will be left in it.
016|063|By Allah, We sent messengers to communities before you, but Satan made their deeds fair-seeming to them. He is their ally today, and a severe punishment awaits them.
016|064|We revealed the Scripture to you, so you may clarify for them what they dispute, and as guidance and mercy for believers.
016|065|Allah sends down water from the sky, thereby reviving the earth after its demise. In this, there is a sign for those who listen.
016|066|There is a lesson for you in livestock: We give you drink from within them. From what’s in their bellies, between excretions and blood, we produce for you pure milk, pleasant for those who drink it.
016|067|And from the fruits of date palms and grapevines, you obtain sugar and good provision. In this, there is a sign for those who think.
016|068|Your Lord inspired the bee: “Establish your hives in the mountains, the trees, and what they construct.”
016|069|Then, feed on the various fruits, and traverse the paths of your Lord with precision. From within their bodies comes a syrup of varying colors, wherein there is healing for people. In this, there is a sign for those who ponder.
016|070|Allah created you; then He will cause you to die. Some of you will be reduced to the most feeble age, so they don’t know anything after having known. Allah is All-Knowing, Most Capable.
016|071|Allah has favored some of you with more provisions than others. Yet those who are favored wouldn’t hand over their provision to those whom their right hands possess so they become equal to them therein. Do they then deny Allah’s blessings?
016|072|Allah created spouses for you from among yourselves, and through them, He blessed you with children and grandchildren. And He provided you with good things of sustenance. Will they believe in falsehoods and show ingratitude for Allah’s blessings?
016|073|They worship powerless idols instead of Allah, idols that don’t have the power to provide for them from the heavens and the earth.
016|074|So, don’t set up parallels to Allah. Allah knows, and you don’t know.
016|075|Allah presents an example: A slave, powerless and owned by his master, versus a man whom We’ve provided with a good livelihood, which he spends secretly and openly. Can they be considered equal? Praise be to Allah, but most of them don’t know.
016|076|Allah illustrates another example: Two men, one mute, incapable of doing anything useful, is completely dependent on his master; no matter how he directs him, he brings nothing good. Can he be compared to one who promotes justice and follows a straight path?
016|077|To Allah belongs the unseen realms of the heavens and the earth. The coming of the Hour is as swift as the blink of an eye, or even swifter. Allah has power over everything.
016|078|Allah brought you out of your mothers’ wombs, devoid of knowledge. He endowed you with hearing, sight, and intellect, that perhaps you would be grateful.
016|079|Don’t they see the birds suspended in mid-air? None sustains them except Allah. In this, there are signs for those who believe.
016|080|Allah provided you with homes for your comfort, and tents made from the hides of animals for your necessities during your travels and periods of rest. He gave you from their wool, fur, and hair, furnishings and goods for a time.
016|081|Allah has given you shade from what He created, and has provided you with retreats in the mountains. He gave you clothing to protect you from the heat, and armor to protect you from your violence. Thus, He perfects His blessings on you, that you may submit.
016|082|If they turn away, your duty is clear communication.
016|083|They recognize Allah’s blessings, yet they reject them, for the majority of them are ungrateful.
016|084|On the Day when We summon a witness from every community, those who disbelieved won’t be allowed to present excuses, nor will they be pardoned.
016|085|When the wrongdoers witness the punishment, it won’t be lessened for them, nor will they be granted delay.
016|086|When those who associated partners with Allah see their supposed partners, they will cry, “Our Lord, these are our partners whom we invoked besides You.” But they will throw back at them the words, “You are liars!”
016|087|On that Day, they will surrender to Allah, and all their invented claims will desert them.
016|088|For those who disbelieve and obstruct others from Allah’s path, We will add to their punishment because of their misconduct.
016|089|On the Day when We summon a witness from every community against them, We bring you as a witness against these. We revealed to you the Scripture, clarifying all things—a guide, mercy, and good news for those who submit.
016|090|Allah commands justice, kindness, and giving to relatives. He prohibits immorality, injustice, and oppression. He advises you, so you may be mindful.
016|091|Fulfill your commitments to Allah, and don’t violate your oaths after their confirmation, having made Allah your guarantor. Allah knows all that you do.
016|092|Don’t be like the woman who unravels her finely spun thread, making your oaths a means of deceit among yourselves. Allah tests you in this manner. On the Day of Resurrection, He will clarify for you everything you disputed.
016|093|If Allah had willed, He could’ve made you one community, but He misguides whom He wills and guides whom He wills. You’ll be questioned about your actions.
016|094|Don’t make your oaths a means of deception between you, lest your footing slips after being firm, and you suffer distress for hindering others from Allah’s path, and incur a terrible punishment.
016|095|Don’t trade Allah’s covenant for a trivial gain; what Allah prepared for you is far superior, if only you knew.
016|096|What you have will run out, but what Allah has remains. We will reward those who are patient according to their best deeds.
016|097|Whoever acts righteously, male or female, and is a believer, We will grant them a good life and reward them according to their best deeds.
016|098|When you read the Quran, seek refuge in Allah from Satan, the outcast.
016|099|He has no authority over those who believe and trust in their Lord.
016|100|His influence extends only to those who take him as an ally and those who associate partners with Him.
016|101|When We replace one verse with another—and Allah knows best what He reveals—they say, “YYou are just making things up.” Yet, most of them lack knowledge.
016|102|Say, “The Holy Spirit brought it down from your Lord, in truth, to stabilize those who believe, and as guidance and good news for the Submitters.”
016|103|We know they say, “A human is teaching him.” The language of the one they maliciously allude to is foreign, yet this is in clear Arabic.
016|104|Those who don’t believe in Allah’s revelations—Allah won’t guide them, and for them is a painful punishment.
016|105|Those who deny Allah’s revelations are the ones who fabricate falsehoods and are untruthful.
016|106|Anyone who rejects Allah after having faith—except for one who is coerced while his heart remains firm in faith—but anyone who opens their heart to disbelief, upon them descends Allah’s wrath, and a grave punishment awaits them.
016|107|That is because they favor the worldly life over the Hereafter. And Allah doesn’t guide the disbelieving people.
016|108|They are the ones Allah sealed their hearts, their hearing, and their sight. They are the ones who are heedless.
016|109|No doubt, they will be the losers in the Hereafter.
016|110|However, to those who emigrated after being persecuted, and who strived and showed patience, your Lord, in return, is forgiving and merciful.
016|111|On that Day, every soul will come pleading for itself, and every soul will be fully compensated for what it has done, and they won’t be wronged.
016|112|Allah presents an example of a secure and peaceful city, its provisions arriving abundantly from every direction. But it showed ingratitude for Allah’s blessings, so Allah made it taste the cloak of hunger and fear, as a consequence of their deeds.
016|113|A messenger from themselves had come to them, but they denied him. So, the punishment seized them while they were wrongdoers.
016|114|So, eat from what Allah provided for you, lawful and good, and be grateful for Allah’s favor, if you truly worship Him.
016|115|He only forbade you dead animals, blood, the flesh of swine, and what has been consecrated to other than Allah. But if one is compelled by necessity, without willful disobedience or transgression, Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
016|116|Don’t say, falsely, with your tongues: “This is lawful, and this is unlawful,” in order to invent lies about Allah. Those who fabricate lies against Allah don’t succeed.
016|117|A brief enjoyment, then they will have a severe punishment.
016|118|We’ve detailed to you the prohibitions imposed on the Jews; We didn’t wrong them, but they used to wrong themselves.
016|119|As for those who commit evil deeds inadvertently, but later repent and reform, your Lord, after that, is Forgiving and Merciful.
016|120|Abraham was an exemplary leader, devoutly obedient to Allah, a monotheist, and he wasn’t among the polytheists.
016|121|Being appreciative of His blessings, He chose him and guided him to a straight path.
016|122|We granted him goodness in this life, and in the Hereafter, he will be among the righteous.
016|123|Then, We revealed to you: Follow the religious path of Abraham, the devout monotheist, who was not of the polytheists.”
016|124|The Sabbath was only instituted for those in dispute over it. Your Lord will resolve their disputes on Resurrection Day.
016|125|Invite to the path of your Lord through wisdom and kind advice, and engage in discussions in the most courteous manner. Your Lord knows best who strays from His path, and He knows best those who are rightly guided.
016|126|If you retaliate, then retaliate proportionately to the offense committed against you. However, if you endure, it is indeed better for those who are patient.
016|127|Be patient; your patience is solely through Allah. Don’t grieve over them, and don’t be distressed by their plots.
016|128|Allah is with the righteous, and those who do good deeds.
017|001|Blessed is He who journeyed His servant by night from the Sacred Mosque to the Farthest Mosque, the precincts We’ve blessed, to show him some of Our wonders. He is the All-Hearing, the All-Seeing.
017|002|We gave Moses the Scripture and made it a guide for the Children of Israel: “Take no protector other than Me.”
017|003|The descendants of those We carried with Noah; a thankful servant he was.
017|004|We forewarned the Children of Israel in the Scripture: “Twice you will spread corruption on earth, and you will ascend to a great height.”
017|005|When the first of these prophecies came to pass, We sent against you Our servants of formidable might, they ravaged through the homes, and it was a fulfilled warning.
017|006|Then, We gave you victory over them, reinforced you with wealth and children, and made you more numerous in human resources.
017|007|If you do good, it’s for yourself. If you do evil, it’s against yourselves. Then, when the second warning was fulfilled, they disfigured your faces, entered the temple as they had entered it the first time, and utterly ravaged all that they overran.
017|008|Perhaps your Lord will have mercy on you. If you revert, We will revert. We made Hell a prison for the disbelievers.
017|009|This Quran guides to what’s most upright and gives good news to the believers who do good deeds, that they’ll have a great reward.
017|010|For those who don’t believe in the Hereafter, We prepared a painful punishment.
017|011|Man prays for harm as he prays for good; man has always been hasty.
017|012|We made the night and the day two marvels. We erased the marvel of the night, and made the marvel of the day illuminating, so that you may seek bounty from your Lord, and may know the number of years and calculations. We explained everything in detail.
017|013|We’ve tied every person’s fate to his neck, and on the Day of Resurrection, We will bring out for him a record, which he will find spread open.
017|014|“Read your record! Today, your soul is enough to account against yourself.”
017|015|Whoever is guided, is guided for his benefit, and whoever strays, does so to his detriment. No bearer of burdens can bear the burdens of another, and We never punish until We have sent a messenger.
017|016|When We decide to destroy a town, We command its affluent ones, who then commit transgressions therein, thus justifying the sentence against it, and We destroy it completely.
017|017|How many generations did We annihilate after Noah? Your Lord is sufficient as an observer and knower of His beings’ sins.
017|018|Whoever desires the fleeting life, We readily grant whatever We will to whomever We choose. We then designate him for Hell, where he will burn, condemned and forsaken.
017|019|But whoever desires the Hereafter, and strives for it with due effort, while being a believer—it is those whose striving is appreciated.
017|020|To all—these and those—We extend from the bounty of your Lord. Your Lord’s giving is not restricted.
017|021|Consider how We’ve preferred some over others, yet the Hereafter offers greater ranks and greater in preference.
017|022|Don’t set up with Allah any other god, lest you find yourself despised and forsaken.
017|023|Your Lord has decreed that you worship none but Him, and that you extend kindness to your parents. If one or both of them attain old age in your presence, don’t say ‘uff’ to them, nor scold them, but address them with respectful words.
017|024|Lower the wing of humility out of compassion for them, and pray, “My Lord, have mercy on them, as they have brought me up when I was small.”
017|025|Your Lord is well aware of what’s within yourselves. If you maintain righteousness, then He is Ever Forgiving to those who are repentant.
017|026|Give due to your relatives, the needy, and the traveler. And don’t squander your wealth.
017|027|The extravagant are brethren of the devils, and Satan has always been ungrateful to his Lord.
017|028|But if you turn away from them, seeking mercy from your Lord for which you hope, then speak to them a gentle word.
017|029|Don’t keep your hand tied to your neck, nor extend it fully, lest you end up blamed and regretful.
017|030|Your Lord dispenses abundantly to whom He wills, and He measures out. He is always All-Knowing, All-Seeing of His beings.
017|031|Don’t kill your children for fear of poverty; We provide for them and for you. Killing them is a grave sin.
017|032|And don’t approach adultery, for it’s an immoral act and an evil way.
017|033|Don’t take a life that Allah deemed sacred, except in the course of justice. If someone is killed unjustly, We’ve given his heir authority, but he must not take life excessively; he will be assisted.
017|034|Don’t approach the orphan’s property, except in the best way, until he reaches maturity. Fulfill your commitments; the commitment is going to be questioned.
017|035|Give full measure when you measure, and weigh with an even balance. That is better and best in interpretation.
017|036|Don’t follow what you have no knowledge of. Hearing, sight, and reasoning—all of those will be questioned.
017|037|Don’t walk arrogantly on earth, for you can’t pierce the ground, nor can you reach the mountains in height.
017|038|All of this—the evil of it—is hated by your Lord.
017|039|This is some of the wisdom your Lord revealed to you. Don’t set up another deity with Allah, lest you be thrown into Hell, blamed and banished.
017|040|Did your Lord favor you with sons while taking for Himself daughters from among the angels? Indeed, you’ve made a grave statement.
017|041|We’ve explained variously in this Quran so that they may remember, but it only increases their rebellion.
017|042|Say, “If there were other gods along with Him, as they claim, they would’ve sought a way to the Lord of the Throne.”
017|043|Far exalted is He above what they say, in His grandeur and supremacy.
017|044|The seven heavens, the earth, and everything within them praise His glory. There is not a thing that does not glorify Him with praise, but you do not understand their glorification. He is Ever-Forbearing, Most Forgiving.
017|045|When you read the Quran, We place an invisible barrier between you and those who don’t believe in the Hereafter.
017|046|We placed covers on their hearts, preventing them from understanding it, and deafness in their ears. When you mention your Lord’s singularity in the Quran, they recoil in repulsion.
017|047|We know what they listen to, when they listen to you, when they conspire, when the wrongdoers say, “You are merely following a man under a spell.”
017|048|Look at the comparisons they make for you; they are astray and can’t find a way.
017|049|And they say, “When we are bones and crumbled particles, will we truly be resurrected in a new creation?”
017|050|Respond, “Be you stones or iron.
017|051|Or any creation you deem more even formidable.” Then they will question, “Who will restore us?” Respond, “The One who created you in the first place.” Then they’ll shake their heads at you and ask, “When will this happen?” Say, “It could be quite soon.”
017|052|On the Day He calls you, you will respond praising Him, realizing that you lingered only briefly.
017|053|Tell My servants to speak in a most kindly manner, for Satan sows discord among them. Satan is a clear enemy of man.
017|054|Your Lord knows you best. If He wills, He will have mercy on you. And if He wills, He will punish you. We didn’t send you as their overseer.
017|055|Your Lord knows everyone in the heavens and on earth. We’ve favored some prophets over others. To David, We gave the Psalms.
017|056|Say, “Invoke those you presume besides Him; they lack the power to alleviate your suffering or change your condition.”
017|057|Those whom they call upon are themselves seeking a way to their Lord, vying for His proximity, hoping for His mercy, and dreading His punishment. Your Lord’s punishment is to be avoided.
017|058|There is no community that We won’t obliterate or severely chastise before Resurrection Day. This is inscribed in the Book.
017|059|Nothing prevents Us from sending miracles, except that the previous generations rejected them. We gave Thamud the she-camel as a clear sign, but they maltreated her. We send signs only to instill fear.
017|060|We’ve informed you that your Lord encompasses all people. The vision We showed you and the cursed tree mentioned in the Quran are trials for people. We frighten them, but it only increases their defiance.
017|061|We commanded the angels, “Prostrate before Adam.” They all did, except for Iblis. He said, “Should I prostrate to one You created from mud?”
017|062|He added, “Do you see this one whom You honored over me? If You defer me until Resurrection Day, I will dominate his descendants, except for a few.”
017|063|He replied, “Go away! Whoever among them follows you, then Hell is your recompensation, an ample recompensation.”
017|064|“And entice whomever you can from among them with your voice. Muster against them your cavalry and your infantry, share the promises of wealth and children, and make promises to them.” However, Satan promises them nothing except deceit.
017|065|“As for My devotees, you have no power over them. Your Lord is sufficient as a Protector.”
017|066|It is your Lord who causes the ship to move for you through the sea, so you may seek His bounty. Indeed, He is Most Merciful to you.
017|067|When danger befalls you at sea, all those you call upon vanish, except for Him. Yet, when He brings you safely to land, you turn away. Man is ever ungrateful.
017|068|Are you confident that He won’t collapse a tract of land beneath you, or unleash a hailstorm upon you? Then, you would find no protector.
017|069|Or are you confident that He won’t return you to it again, unleash a hurricane against you, and drown you due to your ingratitude? Then, you would find no avenger against Us.
017|070|We honored the Children of Adam, transported them on land and sea, provided them with good things, and gave them preference over many of those We created.
017|071|On the Day when We summon every people with their leader, whoever is given his record in his right hand will read his record, and not a thread will be wronged.
017|072|But whoever is blind in this life, will be blind in the Hereafter, and further astray from the path.
017|073|They were about to entice you away from what We have revealed to you, in the hope that you would invent something else about Us; and then they would’ve taken you as a friend.
017|074|Had We not fortified you, you might have leaned towards them a little.
017|075|In that case, We would’ve made you taste double in life, and double at death, and then you would’ve found no helper with respect to Us.
017|076|They almost provoked you, to expel you from the land. But then they wouldn’t have remained after you, except for a short while.
017|077|That is the established way with the messengers We sent before you, and you won’t find any change in Our ways.
017|078|Perform the prayer at the sun’s decline until the darkness of the night, and the Quran at daybreak. The recitation at daybreak is witnessed.
017|079|Spend part of the night in vigil, as a supplementary prayer, so that your Lord may elevate you to a commendable station.
017|080|And pray, “My Lord, let my entry be truthful, and my exit be truthful; and grant me, from You, a supporting authority.”
017|081|And say, “The truth has come, and falsehood has dissipated. Falsehood is bound to dissipate.”
017|082|We reveal in the Quran healing and mercy for believers, but it increases the wrongdoers in nothing but loss.
017|083|When We bestow favor upon a person, he withdraws and turns aside; but when adversity touches him, he is in despair.
017|084|Say, “Each person acts according to his character, and your Lord knows best who is rightly guided.”
017|085|They ask you about the spirit. Respond, “The spirit is by the command of my Lord, and you’ve been given only a little knowledge.”
017|086|If We willed, We could take away what We revealed to you. Then, you would find no one to defend you against Us.
017|087|This is only by the mercy of your Lord. His grace unto you is immense.
017|088|Say, “Even if all humans and jinn were to collaborate to produce something akin to this Quran, they would not succeed, despite their collective efforts.”
017|089|In this Quran, We provide diverse parables for people, yet the majority persist in disbelief.
017|090|They say, “We won’t believe in you unless you make a spring gush out from the ground for us.
017|091|Or unless you own a garden of date palms and grapevines and you make rivers burst forth within it.
017|092|Or unless you cause the sky to fall upon us in pieces, as you claim, or bring Allah and the angels before us.
017|093|Or unless you have a house of gold. Or unless you ascend into the sky. Even then, we won’t believe in your ascension, until you bring down a book for us to read.” Say, “Glory be to my Lord! Am I anything more than a human messenger?”
017|094|What prevents people from believing when guidance has come to them, is their saying, “Allah sent a human as a messenger?”
017|095|Say, “If there were angels on earth walking peacefully, We’d certainly send an angel from heaven as a messenger to them.”
017|096|Say, “Allah is sufficient as a witness between you and me. He is fully aware and observant of His beings.”
017|097|Whomever Allah guides is guided, and whomever He misguides, you will find no helpers for him other than Him. We will gather them on the Day of Resurrection, on their faces—blind, dumb and deaf. Their destination is Hell; whenever it subsides, We will intensify the flames for them.
017|098|That is their retribution for rejecting Our revelations and questioning, “When we are reduced to bones and fragments, will we truly be resurrected as a new creation?”
017|099|Don’t they realize that Allah, who created the heavens and the earth, is able to create their likes? He appointed for them a term, of which there is no doubt. But the wrongdoers refuse anything except disbelief.
017|100|Say, “If you possessed the treasures of the mercy of my Lord, then you would withhold out of fear of spending.” Man is ever reluctant to give.
017|101|We gave Moses nine clear signs. Ask the Children of Israel, when he came to them, Pharaoh said to him, “O Moses, I suspect you are under a spell.”
017|102|He replied, “You’ve certainly known that none sent these down except the Lord of the heavens and the earth, as eye-openers. It seems to me, O Pharaoh, that you are perishing.”
017|103|So he intended to drive them out from the land, but We drowned him and those with him all together.
017|104|Subsequently, We told the Children of Israel, “Settle in the land, and when the promise of the final time comes to pass, We will gather you all together.”
017|105|We revealed it with the truth, and in truth, it descended. We sent you only to give good news and to issue warnings.
017|106|A Quran that We unfolded gradually, for you to read to people over time. We revealed it in stages.
017|107|Say, “Believe in it, or don’t believe. Those who were given knowledge before it, when it is recited to them, fall down on their faces, in humility.
017|108|And they exclaim, “Praise be to our Lord! The promise of our Lord has been fulfilled.”
017|109|And they will fall down, crying, and it would increase them in humility.
017|110|Say, “Call upon Allah, or call upon the Most Merciful. Whichever you call upon Him with, for Him are the most beautiful names.” And don’t be loud in your prayer nor quiet in it, but seek a way in between.
017|111|And say, “Praise be to Allah, who has not begotten a child, who has no partner in sovereignty, who has no ally out of weakness, and magnify Him with all the magnificence.”
018|001|Praise be to Allah, who revealed to His servant the Scripture, free from any distortions.
018|002|It is invaluable—to warn of severe punishment from Him, and as good news to the believers who do righteous deeds, that for them is a good reward.
018|003|Remaining in it forever.
018|004|And to warn those who say, “Allah has begotten a son.”
018|005|They have no knowledge of this, nor did their ancestors. A monstrous utterance comes out of their mouths. They speak nothing but lies.
018|006|Perhaps, you may destroy yourself with grief, chasing after them, if they don’t believe in this narrative.
018|007|We’ve made everything on earth an adornment for it, to test them, and ascertain who performs the best deeds among them.
018|008|But ultimately, We will reduce everything on it into a barren wasteland.
018|009|Do you consider the people of the Cave and the Inscription as among Our extraordinary miracles?
018|010|When they sought sanctuary in the cave, they prayed, “Our Lord, shower us with Your mercy, and arrange our affairs with wisdom.”
018|011|Then We sealed their ears in the cave for some years.
018|012|Then We awakened them, to determine which of the two groups could best estimate the duration of their stay.
018|013|We tell you their story with truth. They were young men who had faith in their Lord, and We augmented them in guidance.
018|014|We strengthened their hearts when they stood up and said, “Our Lord is the Lord of the heavens and the earth. We will never call upon any deity other than Him, for then we would be uttering a colossal falsehood.”
018|015|“These, our people, have taken gods besides Him, without producing clear evidence for them. Who is more unjust than one who fabricates lies against Allah?”
018|016|“Now that you have isolated yourself from them and from what they worship other than Allah, retreat to the cave. Your Lord will extend His mercy upon you and arrange your affairs with ease.”
018|017|You would have seen the sun, as it rose, veering away from their cave to the right, and as it set, bypassing them to the left, while they lay within the spacious area of the cave. This was one of Allah’s signs. Whomever Allah guides is guided, and whomever He leaves to stray, you will find no guiding mentor for him.
018|018|You would have thought they were awake, yet they were asleep. We turned them over, to the right and to the left, with their dog stretching its forelegs at the entrance. If you had observed them, you would’ve turned away from them in fear, and terror-filled.
018|019|We then awakened them, prompting them to question each other. One of them asked, “How long did you stay?” They answered, “We stayed a day or part of a day.” They concluded, “Only your Lord knows the duration of your stay.” “Send one of you with your money to the city, and let him find the best sustenance and bring it back to us. He must be discreet and not draw any attention to you.”
018|020|“If they discover you, they may stone you or force you to revert to their religion, and then you will never succeed.”
018|021|We made their story known to mankind, to demonstrate that Allah’s promise is true, and that there is no doubt about the Hour. When they disputed among themselves their affair, they proposed, “Let us build a structure over them.” Their Lord knows them best. Those who prevailed in the argument said, “We will erect a place of worship over them.”
018|022|Some say, “They were three, their dog being the fourth.” Others will say, “They were five, their dog being the sixth,” guessing at the unseen. Yet, others will say, “They were seven, their dog being the eighth.” Say, “My Lord is more knowledgeable of their number; only a few truly know.” Therefore, don’t argue about them without solid evidence, and don’t seek anyone’s opinion about them.
018|023|And don’t say about anything, “I will do this tomorrow.”
018|024|Without adding, “If Allah wills.” And remember your Lord when you forget, and say, “Perhaps my Lord will guide me towards better conduct than this.”
018|025|They remained in their cave for three hundred years, and nine more.
018|026|Say, “Allah knows best how long they stayed.” His are the mysteries of the heavens and the earth. His sight is perfect, His hearing is perfect. They have no protector against Him, and He shares His rule with no one.
018|027|Communicate what was revealed to you from your Lord’s Scripture. None can alter His words, and you won’t find any refuge besides Him.
018|028|Be content with those who call upon their Lord morning and evening, seeking His countenance. Don’t turn your eyes away from them, desiring the splendors of this worldly life. And don’t obey him whose heart We made heedless of Our remembrance, who follows his desires, and whose affairs are in disarray.
018|029|Say, “The truth is from your Lord; let whoever wishes believe, and whoever wishes disbelieve.” We’ve prepared for the wrongdoers a fire, whose walls will enclose them. When they plead for help, they will be helped with water like molten brass, which scalds the faces. Wretched is the drink, and terrible is the resting place.
018|030|As for those who believe and perform righteous deeds—We never let the reward of any such person, who does good, be wasted.
018|031|They will have gardens of eternal bliss, through which rivers flow. They will be adorned with golden bracelets and wear green garments of fine silk and heavy brocade, reclining on plush couches. Excellent is the reward, and what a splendid resting place.
018|032|Present to them the parable of two men: We blessed one with two vineyards, surrounded by date palms, with crops in the middle.
018|033|Both gardens produced their full yield and never failed, and We caused a river to gush through them.
018|034|And he had fruit. In a conversation with his friend, he boasted, “I have more wealth and have a larger following than you.”
018|035|And he entered his garden, while he wronged himself, saying, “I don’t think this will ever perish.”
018|036|“And I don’t think the Hour will ever come. And even if I’m returned to my Lord, I will surely find something better in place of it.”
018|037|His companion said to him while conversing with him, “Do you deny the One who created you from dust, then from a drop, and then developed you into a man?
018|038|But He, Allah, is my Lord, and I don’t associate anyone with my Lord.
018|039|Why didn’t you say, when you entered into your garden, Whatever Allah wills, there is no strength except in Allah, though you see me lesser than you in wealth and children.’
018|040|Perhaps my Lord will give me something better than your garden, and He may send upon it a calamity from the sky, reducing it to a smooth, slippery plain.
018|041|Or its water might sink so deep into the ground—that you won’t be able to seek it.”
018|042|And his fruits were encircled, and he started wringing his hands in regret over all that he had invested in it, while it lay in ruins on its trellises. He said, “I wish I had not associated anyone with my Lord.”
018|043|There was no party to assist him against Allah, nor was he capable of helping himself.
018|044|All sovereignty belongs only to Allah, the Truth. He is the best at rewarding and the best at determining outcomes.
018|045|And give them an example of the life of this world: it’s like water that We send down from the sky, absorbed by the earth’s plants, and it becomes debris that the winds scatter. Allah has the power over all things.
018|046|Wealth and children are the embellishments of worldly life. But the enduring righteous deeds hold more outstanding merit with your Lord, both in reward and hope.
018|047|On the Day when We set the mountains in motion, and you see the earth laid bare, We will gather them all, not leaving any of them behind.
018|048|They will be presented before your Lord: “You’ve come to Us as We created you the first time. Yet you assumed that We wouldn’t set a date for you.”
018|049|The document will be placed, and you’ll see the guilty fearful of its contents. They will lament, “Woe to us! What kind of document is this that omits nothing, small or large, but takes it into account?” They will find everything they did present. Your Lord doesn’t wrong anyone.
018|050|When We commanded the angels to prostrate themselves before Adam, they all did, except for Iblis. He belonged to jinn and deviated from his Lord’s command. Will you then take him and his offspring as allies, even though they are your enemies? Terrible is the exchange for the wrong-doers!
018|051|I didn’t make them witness the creation of the heavens and the earth, nor their own creation. I don’t take misleaders as helpers.
018|052|On that Day, He will say, “Call upon those you claimed were My partners.” They will call upon them, but they won’t answer them. We put a gap between them.
018|053|The wrongdoers will see the Fire, and realize they are about to fall into it. They will find no deliverance from it.
018|054|In this Quran, We present various parables for people, yet man is the most argumentative being.
018|055|What prevents people from believing and seeking their Lord’s forgiveness when the guidance comes to them? Unless the precedent of the ancients comes to them, or the torment comes to them face to face?
018|056|We send messengers only as bearers of good news and as warners. Yet, those who disbelieve argue with falsehood to defeat the truth, and they treat My signs and warnings as a joke.
018|057|Who is more unjust than the one who, when reminded of his Lord’s verses, turns away from them, and forgets what his hands have put forth? We place covers over their hearts, so they don’t understand it, and deafness in their ears. Even if you call them to guidance, they will never be guided at all.
018|058|Your Lord is All-Forgiving, Full of Mercy. If He were to call them to account for what they’ve earned, He would accelerate their punishment. But they have an appointed time from which they will find no escape.
018|059|And those cities—We destroyed them when they wronged, and We set a fixed time for their destruction.
018|060|When Moses said to his young servant, “I won’t give up until I reach the junction of the two seas, even if it takes me a long time.”
018|061|But when they reached the junction between them, they forgot their fish, which took its course into the sea, slipping away.
018|062|As they journeyed, he told his companion, “Bring us our lunch; we’ve experienced hardship on this journey.”
018|063|He replied, “Do you see when we rested by the rock? I forgot about the fish. Only Satan made me forget to remember it. Amazingly, it made its way into the sea.”
018|064|He said, “That’s what we were seeking!” So they returned following their footsteps.
018|065|Then they came across one of Our servants, to whom We had given mercy from Us and taught knowledge from Us.
018|066|Moses asked him, “May I follow you, so that you may teach me some of the righteousness you were taught?”
018|067|He answered, “You won’t be able to endure with me patiently.
018|068|How could you endure things that you don’t understand?”
018|069|He responded, “If Allah wills, you’ll find me patient, and I won’t disobey any of your instructions.”
018|070|He said, “If you follow me, then don’t question me about anything until I choose to explain it to you.”
018|071|They set out, until, when they boarded the boat, he made a hole in it. He exclaimed, “Did you make a hole in it to drown its passengers? You did a strange thing!”
018|072|He replied, “Didn’t I tell you that you couldn’t be patient with me?”
018|073|He responded, “Don’t reprimand me for forgetting, and don’t be harsh with me.”
018|074|They journeyed on. Upon encountering a boy, he killed him. He questioned, “Did you kill an innocent soul who hadn’t taken another’s life? You did a terrible thing!”
018|075|He replied, “Didn’t I tell you that you couldn’t be patient with me?”
018|076|He said, “If I ask you about anything after this, don’t keep me in your company. You’ve already received enough excuses from me.”
018|077|They journeyed on. Upon reaching a town, they asked its residents for food, but they denied them hospitality. There, they found a wall that was about to collapse, and he repaired it. He commented, “If you had wished, you could’ve demanded a wage for it.”
018|078|He said, “This is where we part ways. I am going to make known to you the interpretation of those things over which you couldn’t hold patience.
018|079|As for the boat, it belonged to poor people who worked at sea. I intended to damage it because a king was approaching who was seizing every boat by force.
018|080|As for the boy, his parents were believers, and we feared he would overburden them with transgression and disbelief.
018|081|So we desired that their Lord would give them in exchange someone better in purity and closer in mercy.
018|082|As for the wall, it belonged to two orphan boys in the city, and beneath it was a treasure that was theirs. Their father was righteous, and your Lord intended for them to reach maturity and retrieve their treasure. I didn’t act of my own accord. This is the interpretation of that over which you couldn’t be patient.”
018|083|They ask you about Dhul-Qarnayn. Say, “I will narrate a portion of his story to you.”
018|084|We established him on earth, and We provided him with a means to do all things.
018|085|He then continued his journey.
018|086|Upon reaching the setting of the sun, he found it setting in a vast muddy spring, and he found people there. We said, “O Dhul-Qarnayn, you can either punish or treat them with kindness.”
018|087|He answered, “As for those who commit wrongdoings, we will punish them. Then, they will be returned to their Lord, subjecting them to an even more severe punishment.
018|088|However, those who believe and perform righteous deeds will receive the finest rewards, we will command them in an easy way.”
018|089|He then continued on his way.
018|090|Upon reaching the rising point of the sun, he found it rising over a people for whom We had not provided any form of protection against it.
018|091|We had full knowledge of what he encountered during his journey.
018|092|Subsequently, he embarked on another expedition.
018|093|Upon reaching a pass between two mountains, he encountered people who could hardly understand any language.
018|094|They implored, “O Dhul-Qarnayn, Gog, and Magog are wreaking havoc in the land; could we possibly compensate you to build a barrier between us and them?’
018|095|He replied, “The strength my Lord has granted me is sufficient. Assist me, and I will erect a fortification between you and them.”
018|096|“Bring me blocks of iron.” Once he had filled the space between the two sides, he said, “Light it up!” Once it was red-hot, he directed, “Bring me molten copper to pour over it.”
018|097|As a result, they were unable to climb it or to tunnel through it.
018|098|He declared, “This is a mercy from my Lord. However, when my Lord’s promise is fulfilled, He will reduce it to rubble. The promise of my Lord is always true.”
018|099|On that Day, We will let them surge like waves into each other. Then the Trumpet will be blown, and We will gather them all together.
018|100|On that Day, We will expose Hell in full view for the unbelievers.
018|101|Those whose eyes were covered from My remembrance, and were unable to hear.
018|102|Do those who disbelieve presume they can take My servants as protectors instead of Me? We prepared Hell as a reception for the unbelievers.
018|103|Say, “Shall we inform you of who will be the greatest losers in respect to their deeds?”
018|104|“Those whose efforts in this worldly life are misguided, while they assume themselves to be doing well in work.”
018|105|These are the ones who denied their Lord’s signs and the meeting with Him. Therefore, their deeds are worthless, and We won’t assign any weight to them on Resurrection Day.
018|106|Their compensation will be Hell, because of their disbelief and mockery of My verses and messengers.
018|107|As for those who believe and perform righteous deeds, they will have the Gardens of Paradise as their place of hospitality.
018|108|There, they will reside eternally, with no desire for relocation.
018|109|Say, “If the ocean were ink for my Lord’s words, the ocean would run out, before my Lord’s words run out,” even if we replenished it with another like it.
018|110|Say, “I am only a human like you, revealed to me that your God is One God. Whoever is hopeful for the meeting with his Lord, let him act righteously, and not associate anyone in the worship of his Lord.”
019|001|Kaf. Ha. Ya. Ayn. Saad.
019|002|This is a mention of your Lord’s mercy towards His servant Zechariah.
019|003|When he silently invoked his Lord in a private prayer.
019|004|He said, “My Lord, my bones have grown frail, and my head is aflame with white hair. Yet, my Lord, I have never been unhappy in my prayer to You.
019|005|And I fear the successors after me, and my wife is barren, so grant me from Yourself an heir.
019|006|Who will inherit from me and the family of Jacob. And make him, my Lord, pleasing.”
019|007|“O Zechariah, We give you good news of a son, named John, a name We’ve never given before.”
019|008|He asked, “My Lord, how can I have a son when my wife is barren, and I have reached an advanced age?”
019|009|He replied, “So it will be; your Lord says, ‘It is easy for Me, just as I created you before, when you were nothing.’”
019|010|He asked, “My Lord, give me a sign.” He replied, “Your sign is that you won’t speak to people for three consecutive nights.”
019|011|Exiting the sanctuary, he signaled to his people to praise morning and evening.
019|012|“O John, adhere firmly to the Scripture.” We gave him wisdom while still a boy.
019|013|And affection from Us, and purity, and he was deeply devout.
019|014|And he was benevolent to his parents, and he was neither arrogant nor disobedient.
019|015|And peace be upon him the day he was born, the day he dies, and the day he is raised alive.
019|016|And mention in the Scripture, Mary, when she distanced herself from her family to an eastern place.
019|017|She placed a veil to separate herself from them. Then We sent her Our Spirit, who appeared to her as a perfectly formed human.
019|018|She exclaimed, “I seek refuge in the Most Merciful from you, if you are Allah-fearing.”
019|019|He replied, “I am the messenger of your Lord, to announce to you the gift of a pure son.”
019|020|She questioned, “How can I have a son, when no man has touched me, and I have not been immoral?”
019|021|He responded, “So it will be; your Lord says, ‘It is easy for Me. And We will make him a symbol for humanity, and mercy from Us. It is a matter already decided.’”
019|022|So she conceived him, and she withdrew with him to a remote place.
019|023|The pains of childbirth drove her to the trunk of a palm tree. She cried, “I wish I had died before this, and was completely forgotten!”
019|024|Then he called her from beneath her, “Grieve not; your Lord has placed a stream beneath you.
019|025|And shake the trunk of the palm-tree towards you, and it will drop upon you fresh, ripe dates.
019|026|So eat, drink, and find comfort. If you see any human, say, ‘I have vowed a fast to the Most Merciful, so I won’t speak to any person today.’”
019|027|Upon her return to her people, carrying him, they exclaimed, “O Mary, you’ve done something unthinkable!
019|028|O sister of Aaron, your father was not a man of disgrace, nor was your mother a woman of dishonor.”
019|029|So she pointed to him. They asked, “How can we speak to a baby in the cradle?”
019|030|He said, “I am the servant of Allah. He has given me the Scripture, and He made me a prophet.
019|031|He made me a blessing wherever I may be, and He enjoined upon me prayer and charity as long as I remain alive.
019|032|And kind to my mother, and He didn’t make me an arrogant oppressor.
019|033|Peace is upon me the day I was born, the day I will die, and the day I will be resurrected alive.”
019|034|This is Jesus, the son of Mary, the Word of Truth about which they are in dispute.
019|035|It’s not for Allah to have a child. Glory be to Him! When He decrees a matter, He only says to it, “Be,” and it becomes.
019|036|“Allah is my Lord and your Lord, so worship Him. This is a straight path.”
019|037|However, the factions disagreed among themselves. Woe to those who disbelieve—from the scene of a tremendous Day.
019|038|How keen their hearing, how sharp their sight, the Day they come to Us. But the wrongdoers today are in clear error.
019|039|Warn them of the Day of Regret, when the matter will be finalized, while they remain oblivious and they don’t believe.
019|040|It is We who will inherit the earth and all who are on it, and to Us, they will be returned.
019|041|And mention in the Scripture Abraham, a man of truth, a prophet.
019|042|When he said to his father, “O my father, why do you worship what can neither hear nor see and can’t benefit you in any way?
019|043|O my father, a specific knowledge that didn’t come to you has come to me. So follow me, and I will guide you to a straight path.
019|044|O my father, don’t worship Satan. Satan has been rebellious against the Most Merciful.
019|045|My dear father, I fear that a punishment from the Compassionate may afflict you, and you become an ally to Satan.”
019|046|He replied, “Are you renouncing my gods, O Abraham? If you don’t desist, I will surely stone you. Now leave me for a long while.”
019|047|He responded, “Peace be upon you. I will ask forgiveness for you from my Lord. He is always gracious to me.
019|048|And I will distance myself from you and what you invoke besides Allah, and I will pray to my Lord. Perhaps I won’t be unhappy in my supplication to my Lord.”
019|049|When he had distanced himself from them and from what they worship besides Allah, We gave him Isaac and Jacob, and each We made a prophet.
019|050|And We showered them with Our mercy, and We made for them a lofty reputation of truth.
019|051|And mention in the Scripture, Moses. He was chosen, and he was a messenger, a prophet.
019|052|We called him from the right side of the Mount, drawing him into close communion.
019|053|Out of Our mercy, We gave him his brother Aaron, a prophet.
019|054|Furthermore, mention in the Scripture, Ishmael. He was faithful to his promise, and was a messenger, a prophet.
019|055|He used to command his family to pray and to give charity, and he was pleasing to his Lord.
019|056|And mention in the Scripture, Enoch. He was a man of integrity, a prophet.
019|057|We elevated him to an esteemed status.
019|058|These are some of the prophets whom Allah blessed; from the progeny of Adam, and those We carried with Noah, and from the offspring of Abraham and Israel, and from those We guided and selected. When the verses of the Most Gracious were recited to them, they collapsed bowing and weeping.
019|059|Yet there succeeded them successors who neglected the prayers and pursued their desires. They will face devastation.
019|060|Except for those who repent, believe, and act righteously, these will enter Paradise, and they won’t be wronged in the slightest.
019|061|The Gardens of Eden which the Most Merciful has promised His servants unseen. His promises have been coming true.
019|062|No idle talk will they hear therein, only words of peace. They will receive their sustenance therein, morning and evening.
019|063|This is the Paradise that We will grant to Our righteous servants.
019|064|“We descend only by the command of our Lord. To Him belongs what’s ahead of us, what’s behind us, and what lies in between. Your Lord is never forgetful.”
019|065|Lord of the heavens, the earth, and what’s between them. So worship Him, and remain steadfast in His worship. Do you know of any counterpart for Him?
019|066|Man asks, “When I am dead, will I then be raised up alive?”
019|067|Doesn’t man remember that We created him before, when he was nothing?
019|068|By your Lord, We will gather them and the devils, and bring them on their knees around Hell.
019|069|Then, We will extract from each group those who were most defiant towards the Most Merciful.
019|070|Then, We will ascertain who deserves to be cast into it.
019|071|Every single one of you will traverse it; this is an irrevocable decree from your Lord.
019|072|Then, We will rescue the righteous and leave the wrongdoers within it, on their knees.
019|073|When Our clear verses are presented to them, those who disbelieve say to those who believe, “Which of the two parties is better in position and better in association?”
019|074|And how many a generation have We destroyed before them who were better in possessions and outward appearance?
019|075|Say, “The Most Merciful prolongs the life of those who are misguided.” Until they witness what they were warned of—either the punishment or the Hour. Then, they will realize who is in a weaker position and whose forces are fewer.
019|076|Allah increases the guidance of those who are guided. The lasting acts of kindness are best with your Lord for reward, yielding the best return.
019|077|Did you consider him who denies Our revelations, and says, “I will be given wealth and children?”
019|078|Did he look into the unseen or receive a guarantee from the Merciful?
019|079|Absolutely not! We will write what he says, and We will prolong his agony for him.
019|080|And We will inherit from him what he mentions, and he will come to Us alone.
019|081|Did they take gods besides Allah to strengthen them?
019|082|They will deny their worship of them and become opponents to them.
019|083|Don’t you see how We send the devils against the unbelievers, provoking them with incitement?
019|084|So, don’t rush against them; We are counting for them a countdown.
019|085|The Day when We gather the righteous to the Most Merciful as a delegation.
019|086|And usher the sinners to Hell, driven in dehydration.
019|087|None will have the power of intercession, except those who have received a promise from the Most Merciful.
019|088|And they say, “The Compassionate has begotten a son.”
019|089|You’ve brought something monstrous.
019|090|The heavens almost rupture therefrom, the earth splits open, and the mountains crumble to dust.
019|091|Because they attribute a son to the Most Merciful.
019|092|It’s not appropriate for the Most Benevolent to have a child.
019|093|Every single one in the heavens and on earth will come to the Most Gracious as a servant.
019|094|He accounted for them and enumerated them exactly.
019|095|And every one of them will come to Him singly on Resurrection Day.
019|096|Those who believe and do good deeds—the Mercy Giver will give them love.
019|097|We’ve made it easy in your language, to give good news to the righteous, and to warn, with it, hostile people.
019|098|How many generations did We destroy before them? Can you sense any of them or hear from them a whisper?
020|001|Ta-Ha.
020|002|We didn’t reveal the Quran upon you to cause you distress.
020|003|Rather, it’s a reminder for those who hold reverence.
020|004|A revelation from He who created the earth and the high heavens.
020|005|The Most Merciful, who is established on the Throne.
020|006|To Him belongs everything in the heavens, everything on earth, everything between them, and everything beneath the soil.
020|007|Whether you speak aloud—He knows the secret and what’s more hidden.
020|008|Allah—there is no god except Him. His are the best names.
020|009|Did you hear the story of Moses?
020|010|When he saw a fire, he told his family, “Stay here, I have noticed a fire. Perhaps I can bring you a torch from it, or find guidance at the fire.”
020|011|As he approached it, he was called, “O Moses!
020|012|I. I am your Lord. Remove your shoes; you are in the sacred valley of Tuwa.
020|013|I have chosen you, so listen to what’s being revealed.
020|014|Surely, it is I. I am Allah. There is no deity except Me. So, worship Me and establish prayer for My remembrance.
020|015|The Hour is coming; I keep it almost hidden, so that every soul may be recompensed for its endeavors.
020|016|Therefore, let not those who don’t believe in it and follow their lusts hinder you from it, else you be ruined.
020|017|And what’s that in your right hand, O Moses?”
020|018|He replied, “It is my staff. I lean on it, herd my sheep with it, and I have other uses for it.”
020|019|He instructed, “Throw it down, O Moses.”
020|020|When he threw it down, it instantly became a moving serpent.
020|021|He said, “Pick it up, and fear not; We will restore it to its original state.
020|022|Now, put your hand under your arm; it will come out white, without any harm—another sign.
020|023|That We may show you some of Our greater signs.
020|024|Go to Pharaoh, for he became tyrannical.”
020|025|He said, “My Lord, calm my heart for me.
020|026|And ease my task for me.
020|027|And remove the knot from my tongue.
020|028|So they may understand my speech.
020|029|Grant me a helper from my family.
020|030|Aaron, my brother.
020|031|Strengthen me through him.
020|032|And let him share in my mission.
020|033|In order to frequently glorify Your praises.
020|034|And remember You frequently.
020|035|You are always watchful over us.”
020|036|He replied, “You have been granted your request, O Moses!
020|037|We’ve favored you before.
020|038|When We inspired your mother with Our message:
020|039|“Put him in a chest and cast it into the river. The river will wash him ashore, where an enemy of Mine and his will take him.” I bestowed upon you love from Me, so that you would be nurtured under My watchful eye.
020|040|Then your sister stepped forward, suggesting, ‘May I direct you to someone who could assist in his upbringing?’ Thus, We returned you to your mother to soothe her heart and relieve her grief. After you had killed a man, We saved you from anxiety and tested you thoroughly. You resided among the people of Midian for several years, until you reached your predestined term, O Moses.
020|041|I prepared you for Myself.
020|042|Go, you and your brother, with My signs, And don’t slacken in My Remembrance.
020|043|Approach Pharaoh, for he transgressed.
020|044|But speak to him mildly; perhaps he may remember or fear.”
020|045|They responded, “Our Lord, we fear that he might lash out against us or become even more tyrannical.”
020|046|He reassured, “Fear not, for I am with you both. I hear, and I see.
020|047|Go to him and say, ‘We are the messengers of your Lord, so send with us the Children of Israel and don’t torment them. We’ve come to you with a sign from your Lord, and peace is upon those who follow the guidance.
020|048|It has been revealed to us that the punishment is upon whoever denies and turns away.’”
020|049|He asked, “Who is your Lord, O Moses?”
020|050|He answered, “Our Lord is the One who gave everything its creation, then guided.”
020|051|He asked, “What was the condition of the earlier generations?”
020|052|He answered, “knowledge about them is with my Lord, documented in a record. My Lord neither errs nor forgets.”
020|053|He who made the earth a habitat for you, and He traced out routes within it. And He sends down water from the sky, with which We produce diverse pairs of plants.
020|054|Eat and let your livestock graze. In this, there are signs for those with discernment.
020|055|From it, We created you, and into it, We will return you. And from it, We will extract you once again.
020|056|We showed him all Our signs, but he denied and refused.
020|057|He said, “Did you come to evict us from our land with your magic, O Moses?
020|058|We will bring you magic like it. So, set a date between us and you, in a neutral place, which neither we nor you will fail to attend.”
020|059|He replied, “Your appointment is on Festival Day, and let the people gather in the morning.”
020|060|Pharaoh turned his back, formulated his plan, and then came back.
020|061|Moses cautioned them, “Woe to you! Don’t forge lies against Allah, lest He destroys you with a punishment; and whoever fabricates lies is bound to fail.”
020|062|They discussed their matter amongst themselves and kept their counsel secret.
020|063|They declared, “These two are magicians who intend to expel you from your land with their magic and abolish your exemplary tradition.
020|064|So, formulate your strategy and come forward as a united front. And indeed, he will succeed this day who is superior.”
020|065|They challenged, “O Moses, either you throw, or we will be the first to throw.”
020|066|He replied, “Rather, you throw.” And suddenly, their ropes and staffs seemed to him from their magic that they were moving.
020|067|And Moses felt fear within himself.
020|068|We said, “Don’t be scared; you have the upper hand.
020|069|Throw that which is in your right hand; it will swallow what they’ve crafted, mere illusions of a magician’s trickery. A magician won’t succeed, wherever he may turn.”
020|070|So the magicians fell down prostrating. They said, “We have believed in the Lord of Aaron and Moses.”
020|071|He threatened, “You dare to believe in Him without my permission? He must be your superior who taught you magic. I will sever your hands and feet on opposite sides, and I will crucify you on the trunks of palm trees. Then you’ll know whose punishment is harsher and more lasting.”
020|072|They responded, “We will never prefer you over the clear proofs that have come to us, nor over Him who created us. So issue whatever decree you wish; your jurisdiction extends only to the life of this world.
020|073|We have put our trust in our Lord, hoping He may forgive our sins and the magic you compelled us to practice. Allah is far superior and everlasting.”
020|074|Whoever comes before his Lord as guilty, for him is hell, where he neither dies nor lives.
020|075|But whoever comes before Him as a believer, having performed righteous deeds—those will attain the highest stages.
020|076|The eternal Gardens of Eternity, through which rivers flow, where they will reside forever—this is the reward for those who purify themselves.
020|077|We revealed to Moses: “Set out at night with My servants, and strike a dry path for them through the sea, without fear of being overtaken or dread.”
020|078|Pharaoh pursued them with his forces, but the sea overwhelmed them, completely submerging them.
020|079|Pharaoh misled his people; he didn’t guide them.
020|080|O Children of Israel, We saved you from your enemy, covenanted with you on the right side of the Mount, and We sent down to you Manna and Quail.
020|081|Eat from the good provisions We provided you, but don’t be excessive in it, lest My wrath descends upon you. Whoever upon whom My wrath descends has fallen.
020|082|I am forgiving to whoever repents, believes, acts righteously, then becomes guided.
020|083|“Why did you rush ahead of your people, O Moses?”
020|084|He replied, “They are on my tracks. I rushed to You, my Lord, so that You might be pleased.”
020|085|He said, “We’ve tested your people in your absence, and the Samarian led them astray.”
020|086|Moses returned to his people, angry and grieved. He said, “O my people, didn’t your Lord make a good promise to you? Did the promise appear too distant to you, or did you wish that wrath from your Lord descends upon you, that you broke your promise to me?”
020|087|They replied, “We didn’t break our promise to you intentionally, but we were made to carry burdens of the people’s ornaments, and we cast them in, as the Samarian suggested.”
020|088|Then he produced for them a statue of a calf which made a mooing sound. They said, “This is your god and the god of Moses, but he forgot.”
020|089|Didn’t they see that it could neither respond to them nor bring them harm or benefit?
020|090|Aaron had already pleaded with them, “O my people, you are being tested by this. Your Lord is the Most Gracious, so follow me and obey my order.”
020|091|They replied, “We won’t cease our devotion to it until Moses returns to us.”
020|092|He said, “O Aaron, what prevented you when you saw them straying?
020|093|From following me? Did you disobey my command?”
020|094|He replied, “O son of my mother, don’t seize me by my beard or head. I feared you would accuse me of causing division among the Children of Israel and not adhering to your words.”
020|095|He then asked, “What’s your explanation, O Samarian?”
020|096|He answered, “I saw what they didn’t see, so I grabbed a handful of the messenger’s trace, and I threw it. That’s what my inner self prompted me to do.”
020|097|Moses declared, “Go away! In this life, you must say, ‘No contact!’ And you have an appointment you can’t evade. Now, look at your god to which you remained devoted. We will burn it and then scatter it into the sea as dust.”
020|098|Your God is the only God, besides whom there is no other god. He encompasses everything in knowledge.
020|099|Thus, We narrate to you some of the stories of what happened before, and We’ve given you from us a Reminder.
020|100|Whoever turns away from it will carry a burden on Resurrection Day.
020|101|They will remain under it forever, an evil for them to bear on Resurrection Day.
020|102|On that Day, the Trumpet is blown, and We will gather the criminals on that Day, blue.
020|103|Whispering among themselves, “You didn’t remain except for ten.”
020|104|We know well what they will say, when the most exemplary among them will say, “You stayed no more than a day.”
020|105|They ask you about the mountains, so say, “My Lord will crumble them into dust.
020|106|He will leave them as a level plain.
020|107|You will see neither elevation or depression in them.”
020|108|On that Day, they will follow the caller without deviation. Voices will be lowered for the Most Merciful, so you will not hear but a whisper.
020|109|On that Day, intercession won’t benefit at all, except for those to whom the Most Merciful has granted permission and whose words He has approved.
020|110|He knows their past and their future, and they can’t comprehend His knowledge.
020|111|All faces will humbly submit to the Ever-Living, the Sustainer. Whoever carries injustice will despair.
020|112|However, those who performed righteous deeds and are believers won’t fear injustice or deprivation.
020|113|We revealed this Quran in Arabic, and We diversified the warnings in it, to foster righteousness or serve as a reminder for them.
020|114|Exalted is Allah, the True King. Don’t hasten with the Quran before its revelation is completed to you, and say, “My Lord, increase me in knowledge.”
020|115|We had previously covenanted with Adam, but he forgot, and We found no resolve in him.
020|116|When We commanded the angels, “Prostrate yourselves before Adam,” they all complied, except for Iblis, who refused.
020|117|We said, “O Adam, this is an enemy to you and your wife. Don’t let him drive you out of Paradise, or you will be miserable.
020|118|In it, you will never experience hunger or nakedness.
020|119|And you won’t be thirsty or suffer from the sun’s heat.”
020|120|Then Satan whispered to him, saying, “O Adam, Shall I lead you to the tree of eternity and a kingdom that never decays?”
020|121|So they ate from it, and their nakedness was revealed to them. Consequently, they started covering themselves with leaves from the Garden. Adam disobeyed his Lord and strayed.
020|122|But then, his Lord selected him, accepted his repentance, and provided guidance.
020|123|He commanded, “Descend from it, all of you, some of you enemies to others. However, when guidance from Me comes to you, those who follow My guidance will neither go astray nor be miserable.
020|124|However, those who disregard My reminder will have a life of hardship, and on the Day of Resurrection, We will resurrect them blind.”
020|125|He will protest, “My Lord, why did You resurrect me blind, though I was sighted?”
020|126|He will reply, “Just as Our revelations came to you, and you dismissed them, so today, you are dismissed.”
020|127|This is how We recompense those who transgress and deny their Lord’s revelations. The punishment of the Hereafter is harsher and more lasting.
020|128|Didn’t they consider how many generations We annihilated before them, in whose dwellings they now roam? There are signs in this for those who possess insight.
020|129|Without a predetermined decree from your Lord and a set term, their doom would’ve been inevitable.
020|130|Therefore, patiently endure their words, and glorify and praise your Lord before sunrise and sunset. And praise Him during the night, and at the day’s extremities, so you may be content.
020|131|Don’t extend your eyes toward what We granted categories among them to enjoy—the splendor of the life of this world—through which We test them. The provision of your Lord is better and more lasting.
020|132|Command your family to establish prayer, and steadfastly maintain it. We don’t ask you for provision; We provide for you. The outcome is for righteousness.
020|133|They say, “Why doesn’t he bring us a sign from his Lord?” Didn’t they receive sufficient evidence in the previous Scriptures?
020|134|If We had annihilated them with a punishment before this, they would have said, “Our Lord, why didn’t You send us a messenger, so we could follow Your verses before we were humiliated and disgraced.”
020|135|Say, “Everyone is waiting; so wait. You will soon know who are the followers of the straight path, and who is guided.”
021|001|The reckoning of humanity is drawing near, yet they remain in heedless disregard.
021|002|Whenever a revelation comes to them from their Lord, fresh, they listen to it while they play.
021|003|With their hearts preoccupied, the wrongdoers confide in private: “Isn’t he just a man like you? Are you going to yield to magic while you can clearly see?”
021|004|He responded, “My Lord knows every word spoken in the heavens and on earth. He is the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing.”
021|005|They even say, “A jumble of dreams,” or “He made it up,” or “He is just a poet.” “Let him bring us a sign, just as the ancients received.”
021|006|Not even one of the cities that we destroyed before them believed; will they then believe?
021|007|We sent before you only men to whom we revealed. Ask the people of the message, if you don’t know.
021|008|We didn’t make them bodies that didn’t eat food, nor were they immortal.
021|009|Then, We fulfilled Our promise to them, rescuing them and those We willed while obliterating the transgressors.
021|010|We revealed to you a Scripture that mentions you explicitly. Don’t you understand?
021|011|How many sinful communities We shatter, and after them, raised other people?
021|012|When they sensed Our power approaching, they tried to flee from it.
021|013|“Don’t run. Return to your luxuries and your homes, so you may be questioned.”
021|014|They cried out, “Alas to us! We were indeed wrongdoers.”
021|015|This cry of theirs continued until We made them like harvested crops, extinguished.
021|016|We didn’t create the heavens, the earth, and everything in between for a pastime.
021|017|If we had wanted to take a pastime, We could have taken it from with Us—if We were to do so.
021|018|Instead, We hurl the truth against falsehood, and it crushes it, leaving it utterly vanquished. Woe unto you, for what you described!
021|019|Everything in the heavens and on earth is His. Those in His presence aren’t too proud to worship Him, nor do they tire.
021|020|They glorify night and day, without ceasing.
021|021|Did they choose gods from the earth who can resurrect?
021|022|If there were gods besides Allah in either of them, they would’ve gone to ruin. Praise be to Allah, the Lord of the Throne, exalted above what they describe.
021|023|He is not questioned about what He does, but they will be questioned.
021|024|Have they chosen other gods besides Him? Say, “Bring your proof. This is a reminder for those with me and a reminder for those before me.” Yet, most of them don’t know the truth and turn away.
021|025|We revealed to every messenger before you, “There is no god but I; so worship me.”
021|026|And they say, “The Most Merciful has begotten a child.” Glorified be He! Rather, they are honored servants.
021|027|They don’t precede Him in speech, and they act only upon His command.
021|028|He knows their past and their future. They can’t intercede except for those He approves of. They stand in awe and reverence of Him.
021|029|Should any among them dare to say, “I am a god besides Him,” We will recompense him with Hell; this is the recompense of transgressors.
021|030|Do the disbelievers not see that the heavens and the earth were a joined entity, which We then separated? And from water, We brought forth all living things. Will they not then believe?
021|031|We placed upon it firm mountains, lest it should shake with them, and We made therein passageways, so they may be guided.
021|032|We made the sky a protected ceiling, yet they turn away from its signs.
021|033|It is He who created the night, the day, the sun, and the moon, each gliding in an orbit.
021|034|We didn’t grant any human before you immortality. So, if you were to die, would they then live forever?
021|035|Every soul will taste death. We burden you with bad and good—a test. And to Us, you will be returned.
021|036|When the unbelievers see you, they take you for mockery: “Is this the one who speaks about your gods?” Yet they deny the mention of the Most Merciful.
021|037|Man was created hasty. I will show you My signs, so don’t rush.
021|038|And they ask, “When will this promise be fulfilled, if you are truthful?”
021|039|If those who disbelieved only knew, when they won’t be able to fend off the fire from their faces or their backs, and they won’t be aided.
021|040|It will come upon them suddenly, and they will become startled. They won’t be able to repel it nor will they be granted respite.
021|041|Messengers before you were also ridiculed, but those who mocked were then engulfed by what they used to mock.
021|042|Say, “Who is there to protect you, night and day, from the Merciful?” Yet, they turn away from the remembrance of their Lord.
021|043|Do they have gods who can protect them from Us? They can’t help themselves, and they won’t be protected from Us.
021|044|We allowed them and their ancestors to enjoy extended periods of comfort and luxury. Don’t they see how We gradually reduce the land from its borders? Are they then the victors?
021|045|Say, “I only warn you by revelation.” However, the deaf won’t hear the call when they are warned.
021|046|Yet if a breath of your Lord’s punishment were to touch them, they would cry out, “Woe to us, we were indeed wrongdoers.”
021|047|On the Day of Resurrection, We will establish the scales of justice. No soul will be wronged in the slightest. Even if it’s the weight of a mustard seed, We will bring it in. And sufficient are We as accountants.
021|048|We gave Moses and Aaron the Criterion, a light, and a reminder for the righteous.
021|049|Those who fear their Lord in private and dread the Hour.
021|050|This, too, is a blessed message that We revealed. Will you then deny it?
021|051|We had previously given Abraham wisdom, and We were well aware of him.
021|052|He questioned his father and his people, “What are these idols to which you are so devoted?”
021|053|They replied, “We found our ancestors worshiping them.”
021|054|He stated, “You and your ancestors have been in manifest error.”
021|055|They asked, “Did you bring us the truth, or are you merely playing?”
021|056|He responded, “Indeed, your Lord is the Lord of the heavens and the earth, He who originated them, and I am to this a witness.
021|057|And by Allah, I will plan against your idols after you have gone away.”
021|058|So he reduced them to fragments, except their largest, so they might return to it.
021|059|They exclaimed, “Who did this to our gods? He must be a villain.”
021|060|They said, “We heard a young man mention them; his name is Abraham.”
021|061|They demanded, “Bring him before the eyes of the people, that they may testify.”
021|062|They interrogated, “Was it you who did this to our gods, O Abraham?”
021|063|He responded, “No, this, their biggest one did it. Ask them, if they can speak.”
021|064|So they turned to themselves and said, “You yourselves are the wrongdoers.”
021|065|But then they were reverted to their former notion: “You know well that these can’t speak.”
021|066|He countered, “Do you then worship, instead of Allah, things that can neither benefit you at all nor harm you?
021|067|Shame on you and what you worship besides Allah! Do you have any sense?”
021|068|They demanded, “Burn him and support your gods, if you are to act.”
021|069|We said, “O fire, be cool and safe for Abraham.”
021|070|They plotted to harm him, but We made them the greatest losers.
021|071|We saved him and Lot, bringing them to the land We had blessed for all the worlds.
021|072|We granted him Isaac and Jacob additionally, and we made each of them righteous.
021|073|We made them leaders who guided by Our command, and We inspired them to do good deeds, establish prayer, and give alms. They were worshippers of Us.
021|074|And to Lot, We gave wisdom and knowledge, and We saved him from the city that practiced the abominations. They were wicked and sinful people.
021|075|We brought him into Our mercy; he was among the righteous.
021|076|And Noah, when he called out to Us before, We responded to him and saved him and his family from the great distress.
021|077|And We supported him against the people who denied Our signs. They were evil people, so We drowned them all.
021|078|And David and Solomon, when they judged concerning the field, when some people’s sheep strayed and grazed therein. We were witnesses to their judgment.
021|079|We granted Solomon understanding of it, and We bestowed on them wisdom and knowledge. We made the mountains and birds join David in Our praises. This was Our doing.
021|080|And We taught him the craft of making coats of armor for you, to protect you in your wars. Will you then be grateful?
021|081|To Solomon, We subjected the wind, blowing forcefully at his command towards the land that We had blessed. We are aware of all things.
021|082|To him, we assigned some devils who dived and performed various minor tasks, but We kept them under strict control.
021|083|And Job, when he implored his Lord, “Adversity has afflicted me, yet You are the Most Merciful of the merciful.”
021|084|We responded to him, alleviated his suffering, and restored his family to him, along with others like them, as a mercy from Us, and a reminder for the worshippers.
021|085|And Ishmael, Enoch, and Ezekiel—each of them was among the patient.
021|086|We embraced them in Our mercy, for they were among the righteous.
021|087|And Jonah, when he stormed out in fury, thinking We had no power over him. Then he called out in the darkness, “There is no god but You! Glory be to You! Indeed, I was among the wrongdoers!”
021|088|So We answered him and saved him from the distress. Thus We save the believers.
021|089|And Zechariah, when he implored his Lord, “My Lord, don’t leave me alone, while You are the best of inheritors.”
021|090|So We answered him and gave him John, and remedied his wife for him. They were always quick to perform good deeds, and they called upon Us with fervor and humility; they were devout to us.
021|091|And she who guarded her chastity, so We breathed into her from Our spirit, and We made her and her son a sign for all peoples.
021|092|This community of yours is a single community, and I am your Lord, so worship Me alone.
021|093|Yet they fragmented their religion among themselves, but all will return to Us.
021|094|Whoever acts righteously, while a believer, his efforts won’t be denied. We write it down for him.
021|095|There is a ban upon any city We’ve destroyed; they may not return.
021|096|Until when Gog and Magog are let loose, and they swoop down from every height.
021|097|And when the true promise draws near, then behold, the eyes of those who disbelieved will be staring in horror: “Alas for us! We were oblivious to this; indeed, we were wrongdoers.”
021|098|You, along with anything you worship other than Allah, are fuel for Hell. To it you will be headed.
021|099|Had these been gods, they wouldn’t have been entered into it. All will remain therein eternally.
021|100|There, they will groan; there, they won’t be heard.
021|101|Those for whom We decreed the best will be kept far removed from it.
021|102|They won’t hear its hiss, and they will remain in what their souls desire forever.
021|103|The greatest terror won’t grieve them, and the angels will welcome them: “This is your Day which you were promised.”
021|104|On that Day, We will fold the heavens like the folding of a book. Just as We began the first creation, so We will repeat it. That’s a promise binding upon Us. Indeed, We will do it.
021|105|We’ve written in the Psalms, after the Reminder: “My righteous servants will inherit the earth.”
021|106|In this there is a message for a people who worship.
021|107|We sent you only as a mercy for all worlds.
021|108|Say, “It has been revealed to me that your God is One God. Are you going to submit?”
021|109|If they turn away, say, “I have warned you adequately, and I don’t know if what you’re promised is near or far.
021|110|He certainly knows what’s spoken aloud, and He also knows what you conceal.
021|111|And I don’t know; perhaps it might be a test for you and enjoyment for a time.”
021|112|He said, “My Lord, judge with the truth.” And “Our Lord, the Most Merciful, whose help is sought against what you describe.”
022|001|O people, beware of your Lord, for the quake of the Hour is something tremendous.
022|002|On the Day you witness it, every nursing mother will forget her nursling, and every pregnant woman will miscarry. You will see people drunk, yet they are not drunk. The punishment of Allah is severe.
022|003|Some people argue about Allah without knowledge, guided by every rebellious devil.
022|004|It has been decreed about him, that whoever turns to him, he will mislead him and guide him to the suffering of the Blaze.
022|005|O people, if you doubt the Resurrection, We created you from dust, then from a drop, then from a clinging clot, and then from a lump, formed and unformed, to show you. We settle in the wombs whom We will for a preordained term, then We bring you out as infants, until you reach your full strength. Some of you may pass away, while others are returned to the feeblest old age, so they know nothing after knowing much. You see the earth barren, but when We send down rain upon it, it stirs, swells, and produces every delightful pair.
022|006|This is because Allah is the Ultimate Truth, revives the dead, and has power over all things.
022|007|The Hour is to come—there is no doubt about it—Allah will resurrect those who are in the graves.
022|008|Some people argue about Allah without knowledge, guidance, or an enlightening Scripture.
022|009|They bend it to mislead others from Allah’s path. For them is humiliation in this world, and on Resurrection Day, We will make them taste the punishment of the Burning Fire.
022|010|This is what your hands sent ahead, and Allah is never unjust to the servants.
022|011|Among people, there is one who worships Allah on edge. If good touches him, he is content, but if a trial strikes him, he reverts, losing both this world and the Hereafter. This is the clear loss.
022|012|He prays to, instead of Allah, what neither harms nor benefits him. That is straying far.
022|013|He invokes one whose harm is closer than his benefit—what an evil patron and what an evil companion!
022|014|Allah will admit those who believe and act righteously into Gardens through which rivers flow. Allah does whatever He wills.
022|015|Whoever thinks that Allah won’t help him in this life and the Hereafter, let him extend to the sky, cut, and see if his strategy eliminates what enrages him.
022|016|And thus, We sent it down as clear signs, and surely, Allah guides whom He wills.
022|017|Those who believe, the Jews, the Sabeans, the Christians, the Zoroastrians, and those who associate—Allah will judge between them on Resurrection Day. Allah is a Witness over all things.
022|018|Don’t you see that everything in the heavens and the earth bows down to Allah—the sun, the moon, the stars, the mountains, the trees, the animals, and many people? Yet, many are deserving of suffering. Whomsoever Allah humiliates, none can honor. Allah does what He wills.
022|019|These are two opponents who dispute concerning their Lord. For those who disbelieve, garments of fire will be tailored, and scalding water will be poured over their heads.
022|020|Melting their insides and their skins.
022|021|For them are iron maces.
022|022|Every time they seek to escape their torment, they are returned to it: “Taste the punishment of the blazing Fire!”
022|023|However, Allah will admit those who believe and act righteously into Gardens beneath which rivers flow, where they’ll be adorned with bracelets of gold and pearls, and their clothing will be of silk.
022|024|They’ve been guided to good speech and to the path of the Praiseworthy.
022|025|Those who disbelieve and obstruct Allah’s path and the Sacred Mosque—which We’ve designated for all people, whether they reside nearby or are from afar—anyone who seeks to desecrate it with wickedness, We will make them taste a severe punishment.
022|026|We showed Abraham the site of the House: “Don’t associate anything with Me, and purify My House for those who circumambulate it, stand in prayer, bow down, and prostrate.”
022|027|Announce the pilgrimage to humanity. They will come to you on foot and every mode of transport, coming from every distant pass.
022|028|To witness benefits, and to commemorate Allah’s name during the known days, for providing them with livestock. So, eat from them and feed the destitute poor.
022|029|Then, let them complete their rites, fulfill their vows, and circumambulate the Ancient House.
022|030|That is the command. Whoever respects the sanctities of Allah, it’s best for him with his Lord. Livestock is permissible for you, except for those explicitly prohibited. Shun the filth of idols, and avoid false speech.
022|031|Being devoted to Allah, not associating anything with Him. Whoever associates partners with Allah, it is as though he has fallen from the sky and is either snatched by birds or carried away by the wind to a distant place.
022|032|So it is. Whoever venerates Allah’s symbols is from the purity of the hearts.
022|033|There are benefits for you in them for a specified term; their final destination is the Ancient House.
022|034|We instituted a rite for every community so they may mention Allah’s name over the livestock He provided for them. Your God is One God, so surrender to Him, and give good news to the humble.
022|035|Those whose hearts tremble at the mention of Allah, those who persevere in patience in whatever afflicts them, who establish prayer, and who spend out of what We’ve provided them.
022|036|We designated the sacrificial animals among Allah’s symbols for you. They hold benefits for you. When they are lined up, pronounce Allah’s name over them. Once they have fallen on their sides, eat from them and feed those in need, whether they ask or not. Thus, We tamed them to you, so you may give thanks.
022|037|Neither their flesh nor their blood reaches Allah, but your piety does. He tamed them to you, to extol Allah’s greatness for guiding you. Give good news to the doers of good.
022|038|Allah defends the believers. Allah has no love for any ungrateful traitor.
022|039|Permission is given to those who were fought against because they were wronged; indeed, Allah can grant them victory.
022|040|Those who were unjustly evicted from their homes, simply for saying, “Our Lord is Allah.” Had Allah not repelled some people by means of others, numerous monasteries, churches, synagogues, and mosques, where Allah’s name is frequently invoked, would’ve been demolished. Allah will support those who support His cause. Allah is Powerful and Mighty.
022|041|Those who, when We empower them on earth, establish prayer, give charity, promote what’s right, and forbid what’s wrong. The final decision in all matters belongs to Allah.
022|042|If they reject you, so before them, the people of Noah and Aad and Thamud had rejected.
022|043|And the people of Abraham, and the people of Lot.
022|044|And the inhabitants of Midian. Moses, too, was accused of lying. I granted delay to the unbelievers, then I seized them. So how terrible was My condemnation?
022|045|How many a town did We destroy while it was committing wrong? They now lie in ruins, with abandoned wells and lofty mansions.
022|046|Didn’t they travel through the earth and use their intellect to understand, and their ears to listen? It’s not the eyes that go blind, but it’s the hearts in the chests that do.
022|047|They challenge you to hasten the punishment, but Allah will never fail in His promise. A day with your Lord is like a thousand years by your calculations.
022|048|And how many a town did I prolong while it was committing wrong? To Me is the ultimate return.
022|049|Say, “O people, I am only a clear warner to you.”
022|050|Those who believe and perform righteous deeds will receive forgiveness and a generous reward.
022|051|But those who strive to frustrate Our revelations will be inhabitants of Hell.
022|052|We never sent a messenger or a prophet before you without Satan attempting to interfere with his desires. Yet, Allah nullifies what Satan insinuates, and Allah reinforces His revelations. Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise.
022|053|Satan’s insinuations are a trial for those with diseased and hardened hearts. The wrongdoers are in profound discord.
022|054|Those endowed with knowledge recognize the truth from your Lord; they believe in it, and their hearts humble to it. Allah guides those who believe to a straight path.
022|055|But the unbelievers will remain in doubt until the Hour suddenly overtakes them—or the punishment of a barren day befalls them.
022|056|On that Day, the dominion will belong exclusively to Allah; He will judge between them. Those who believed and did righteous deeds will be in the Gardens of Bliss.
022|057|But those who disbelieved and denied Our signs—for those there will be a humiliating punishment.
022|058|Those who emigrated for Allah’s cause and were then killed or died, Allah will provide for them a good provision. Allah is the best of providers.
022|059|He will admit them to an entrance they will find pleasing. Allah is All-Knowing, Most Forbearing.
022|060|That is so. If anyone retaliates in equivalence to the harm inflicted upon him, and is transgressed upon, Allah will assist him. Allah is Pardoning and forgiving.
022|061|That is because Allah merges night into day and day into night; Allah is Hearing and Seeing.
022|062|That is because Allah is the Reality, while what they call upon besides Him is falsehood; and because Allah is the Most High, the Grand.
022|063|Didn’t you see how Allah sends down water from the sky, causing the earth to become green? Allah is Subtle and Aware.
022|064|To Him belongs everything in the heavens and the earth. Allah is the Self-Sufficient, the Praiseworthy.
022|065|Didn’t you see how Allah made everything on earth subservient to you? Ships sail the sea by His laws. He holds the sky from falling on earth, unless by His permission. Allah is Compassionate and Merciful to humankind.
022|066|It is He who gave you life, will cause you to die, and will then revive you. Yet, man is ungrateful.
022|067|For every community, We established certain rites which they follow, so don’t let their disputes entangle you. Instead, invite to your Lord. You are on a straight path.
022|068|If they argue with you, say, “Allah knows best about what you’re doing.”
022|069|On the Day of Resurrection, Allah will judge between you, resolving all your disputes.
022|070|Don’t you know that Allah is aware of everything in the heavens and the earth? All of this is recorded in a book; this is easy for Allah.
022|071|They worship, besides Allah, what He didn’t authorize, which they have no knowledge of. The wrongdoers will have no supporter.
022|072|When Our clear verses are conveyed to them, you will notice disdain on the faces of the unbelievers. They nearly assault those who convey Our verses to them. Say, “Shall I inform you of something worse than that? The Fire which Allah has promised those who disbelieve, and wretched is the destination!”
022|073|O people, a parable is presented; listen to it attentively: those you call upon besides Allah can’t even create a fly, even if they combined their efforts. And if a fly were to snatch something away from them, they would be unable to retrieve it. Both the seeker and the sought are weak.
022|074|They don’t appreciate Allah as He ought to be appreciated. Allah is Powerful and Mighty.
022|075|Allah chooses messengers from among angels and humans. Allah is All-Hearing, All-Seeing.
022|076|He knows their past and their future. All matters will return to Allah.
022|077|O you who believe, bow and prostrate yourselves, and worship your Lord, and do good, so that you may succeed.
022|078|Strive for Allah with the striving due to Him. He has chosen you and imposed no difficulty upon you in religion—the way of your forefather Abraham. He named you ‘Submitters’ from before, and in this, so that the Messenger may bear witness over you, and you may bear witness over the people. Therefore, establish prayers, give charity, and hold fast to Allah. He is your Protector—a splendid Guardian and a superb Helper.
023|001|The believers have attained success.
023|002|Those who are humble in their prayers.
023|003|Those who avoid vain talk.
023|004|Those who are active in charitable deeds.
023|005|Those who protect their chastity.
023|006|Except from their wives or what their right hands possess, for they aren’t to be blamed.
023|007|However, those who seek beyond that are the transgressors.
023|008|Those who faithfully uphold their trusts and promises.
023|009|And those who guard their prayers.
023|010|These are the inheritors.
023|011|Who will inherit Paradise, therein to dwell forever.
023|012|We created man from an extract of clay.
023|013|Then, We placed him as a drop in a secure dwelling place.
023|014|Then, We transformed the drop into a clot, then developed the clot into a lump, then shaped the lump into bones, then clothed the bones with flesh. Then, We brought him forth as another creation. So, blessed is Allah, the Best of Creators.
023|015|Afterward, you will surely die.
023|016|Then, on the Day of Resurrection, you will be resurrected.
023|017|We created above you seven pathways, and We are never unmindful of creation.
023|018|We send down water from the sky in due measure, storing it within the earth, and We can take it away.
023|019|Through it, We produce for you gardens of date palms and vineyards, yielding abundant fruits from which you eat.
023|020|Also, a tree that springs forth from Mount Sinai, producing oil and relish for the eaters.
023|021|In livestock, too, there is a lesson for you: We provide you with a drink from what’s in their bellies, and there are numerous other benefits for you in them, and of them, you eat.
023|022|And on them, as well as on ships, you are transported.
023|023|We sent Noah to his people, and he pleaded, “O my people, worship Allah; you have no god but Him. Will you not then be righteous?”
023|024|However, the leaders of his people who disbelieved said, “This is nothing but a man like yourselves, seeking to assert dominance over you. If Allah had willed, He could’ve sent down angels. We’ve never heard of this from our forefathers.
023|025|He is only a man with delusions. Just ignore him for a while.”
023|026|He prayed, “My Lord, assist me, because they have rejected me.”
023|027|We revealed to him: “Construct the Ark under Our observation and by Our inspiration. When Our command comes, and the oven overflows, take on board a pair of every kind, and your family, excluding those upon whom the sentence has been pronounced. And don’t plead with Me on behalf of those who did wrong; they are to be drowned.”
023|028|When you and those with you are settled in the Ark, say, “Praise be to Allah who has delivered us from the wrong-doing people.”
023|029|And pray, “My Lord, make me land with a blessed landing, for You are the best to ensure a safe landing.”
023|030|In this, there are lessons, and We are constantly testing.
023|031|Then, after them, We established another generation.
023|032|We sent a messenger from among them, proclaiming, “Worship Allah; you have no deity other than Him. Won’t you protect yourselves?”
023|033|The leaders of his people who disbelieved and denied the meeting in the Hereafter, and We had given them affluence in the worldly life, countered, “This is merely a man like you, who eats what you eat and drinks what you drink.
023|034|If you obey a man like yourselves, you will surely be at a loss.
023|035|Does he promise you that, when you die and become dust and bones, you will be resurrected?
023|036|Far-fetched, far-fetched is what you’re promised.
023|037|Our life is only this present existence; we live, die, and won’t be resurrected.
023|038|He is just a man inventing lies about Allah, and we’re not going to believe in him.”
023|039|He pleaded, “My Lord, assist me, because they have denied me.”
023|040|He replied, “In a little while, they will be regretful.”
023|041|The blast justly overtook them, reducing them to ruins. Thus, the wrongdoers were no more.
023|042|Then, after them, We raised up other generations.
023|043|No nation can advance its term, nor delay it.
023|044|We sent Our messengers in succession. Whenever a messenger came to his people, they denied him, branding him a liar. So, We made them follow each other, turning them into tales of the past. So, away with those who refuse to believe!
023|045|Then, We sent Moses and his brother Aaron with Our signs and a clear authority.
023|046|To Pharaoh and his aristocracy, they reacted with arrogance and superiority.
023|047|They said, “Are we to believe in two men like us, while their people serve us as slaves?”
023|048|Thus, they rejected them both and were consequently doomed to destruction.
023|049|We gave Moses the Scripture, so they may be guided.
023|050|And We made the son of Mary and his mother a sign, and We sheltered them on a plateau with security and flowing springs.
023|051|O Messengers, eat from the pure and good foods, and do good deeds. I am fully aware of everything you do.
023|052|This community of yours is one community, and I am your Lord, so fear Me.
023|053|Yet they fragmented into denominations, each rejoicing in its doctrines.
023|054|So leave them in their bewilderment until a time.
023|055|Do they assume that by granting them wealth and children.
023|056|We are racing to give them good things? They don’t perceive.
023|057|And those who, due to the fear of their Lord, are apprehensive.
023|058|And those who believe in the signs of their Lord.
023|059|And those who don’t associate anything with their Lord.
023|060|And those who give what they give with hearts trembling, because they will return to their Lord.
023|061|These are the ones who compete in goodness and are foremost in doing so.
023|062|We don’t burden a soul beyond its capacity. With Us is a record that speaks with truth, and they won’t be wronged.
023|063|But rather, their hearts are in confusion over this, and they engage in deeds that contradict it.
023|064|Until, when We seize their elite with torment, they begin to groan.
023|065|Don’t groan today; you will receive no assistance from Us.
023|066|My verses were conveyed to you, yet you backed away from them.
023|067|You reacted arrogantly towards them, debated against them baselessly, and outright rejected them.
023|068|Don’t they ponder over the Word? Or did news come to them that didn’t come to their ancestors?
023|069|Or did they fail to recognize their Messenger, and thus, they deny him?
023|070|Or do they say, “He is possessed”? In fact, he brought them the truth, and most of them hate the truth.
023|071|If the truth were to follow their desires, the heavens, the earth, and everything within them would surely be in chaos. We gave them their reminder, yet they disregard their reminder.
023|072|Are you demanding a fee from them? The reward from your Lord is far better, for He is the best of providers.
023|073|You are inviting them to a straight path.
023|074|Yet, those who don’t believe in the Hereafter veer away from the path.
023|075|Even if We were to show them mercy and alleviate their troubles, they would stubbornly persist in their transgression, wandering blindly.
023|076|We had afflicted them, yet they didn’t turn to their Lord or humble themselves.
023|077|Until, when We opened upon them a gate of intense pain, they were left in utter despair.
023|078|It is He who endowed you with hearing, sight, and hearts, yet you rarely give thanks.
023|079|It is He who scattered you throughout the earth, and to Him, you will be gathered.
023|080|It is He who gives life and causes death, and His is the alternation of night and day. Don’t you comprehend?
023|081|They merely repeat what was said by those before them.
023|082|They question, “After we have died and become dust and bones, will we be resurrected?
023|083|We and our forefathers were promised this before—these are nothing but legends of the ancients.”
023|084|Ask them, “To whom does the earth and everything on it belong, if you truly know?”
023|085|They will respond, “To Allah.” Say, “Then why don’t you reflect?”
023|086|Ask them, “Who is the Lord of the seven heavens and the Lord of the Majestic Throne?”
023|087|They will answer, “Allah.” Say, “Won’t you be righteous?”
023|088|Say, “In whose hands is sovereignty over everything, and He provides protection but requires none, if you truly possess knowledge?”
023|089|They will say, “Allah.” Say, “Then how are you bewitched?”
023|090|We brought them the truth, yet they persist in denial.
023|091|Allah has never begotten a child, nor is there any god besides Him. If there were, each god would have claimed what it created, and some would’ve sought supremacy over others. Glory be to Allah, far beyond what they describe.
023|092|He is the Knower of the unseen and the seen, far above having a partner.
023|093|Say, “My Lord! If You should show me what they’ve been promised.
023|094|My Lord, place me not among the wrongdoers.”
023|095|We can show you what We’ve promised them.
023|096|Repel evil with what’s better. We know best what they describe.
023|097|And say, “My Lord, I seek refuge in You from the whispers of the devils.
023|098|And I seek Your protection, my Lord, lest they become present.”
023|099|Until, when death comes to one of them, he pleads, “My Lord, let me return.
023|100|So that I may rectify what I left undone.” By no means! It is merely a word he says; a barrier stands behind them until the Day they are resurrected.
023|101|When the Trumpet is blown, on that Day, all familial ties among them will be severed, and they won’t have the means to inquire after one another.
023|102|Those whose scales are heavy will be the successful ones.
023|103|However, those with light scales will have lost their souls, remaining in Hell forever.
023|104|The Flames will scorch their faces, disfiguring them beyond recognition.
023|105|“Were My verses not conveyed to you, yet you denied them?”
023|106|They will respond, “Our Lord, our wretchedness overcame us, and we were led astray.
023|107|Our Lord, remove us from this. If we were to revert, we would indeed be wrongdoers.”
023|108|He will say, “Remain despised therein, and don’t speak to Me.
023|109|A group of My servants used to say, ‘Our Lord, we have believed, so forgive us, and have mercy on us, You are the Best of the Merciful.’
023|110|But you made fun of them, to the extent that it made you forget My remembrance, and you used to laugh at them.
023|111|“Today, I have rewarded them for their patience; truly, they are the ones who have triumphed.”
023|112|He will ask, “How long did you stay on Earth in terms of years?”
023|113|They will answer, “We stayed a day or part of a day; ask those who count.”
023|114|He will say, “In fact, you stayed only a little—if only you had known.
023|115|Did you think that We created you without purpose, and that you wouldn’t be returned to Us?”
023|116|So exalted is Allah, the True King. There is no deity except Him, the Lord of the Noble Throne.
023|117|Whoever invokes, beside Allah, another god for which he has no proof, then his account rests with his Lord. The unbelievers won’t succeed.
023|118|Say, “My Lord, forgive and have mercy, for You are the Best of the merciful.”
024|001|A chapter that We revealed and made obligatory, containing clear verses, so that you may remember.
024|002|Regarding the adulteress and the adulterer, administer one hundred lashes to each. Let not pity for them prevent you from implementing Allah’s Law—if you believe in Allah and the Last Day. Let a group of believers witness their punishment.
024|003|An adulterer may only marry an adulteress or a polytheistic woman, and an adulteress may only marry an adulterer or a polytheistic man. This is prohibited for the believers.
024|004|Those who falsely accuse chaste women, yet fail to produce four witnesses, whip them with eighty lashes, and reject their testimony after that. These are the sinful ones.
024|005|However, those who repent and reform afterwards—Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
024|006|If a man accuses his wife, but has no witnesses except himself, he must swear by Allah four times that he is truthful.
024|007|On the fifth instance, he must invoke Allah’s curse upon himself if he’s lying.
024|008|Her punishment will be averted if she swears four times by Allah that he’s lying.
024|009|On the fifth occasion, she must invoke Allah’s wrath upon herself, if he is truthful.
024|010|But for Allah’s grace and mercy upon you, and that Allah is Accepting of Repentance, Wise.
024|011|Those who initiated the slander are a group among you. Don’t consider it harmful for you; it is beneficial for you. Each person involved will bear a portion of the sin, but the one who played the major role will face harsh punishment.
024|012|When you heard it, the believing men and women should’ve thought positively of one another and said, “This is obviously a lie.”
024|013|Why didn’t they produce four witnesses for it? If they don’t produce the witnesses, then in the sight of Allah, they are the liars.
024|014|Were it not for Allah’s grace and mercy upon you, in this world and the Hereafter, a tremendous punishment would’ve befallen you for what you engaged in.
024|015|You propagated it with your tongues and spoke with your mouths what you had no knowledge of, considering it trivial, while it was, in the sight of Allah, significant.
024|016|Upon hearing it, you should’ve said, “It is not for us to speak of this. Glory be to You, this is a serious slander.”
024|017|Allah admonishes you never to return to such a thing, if you are believers.
024|018|Allah clarifies the verses for you. Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise.
024|019|Those who love to see immorality among the believers will face severe punishment in this life and the Hereafter. Allah knows, and you don’t know.
024|020|Allah extends His grace and mercy upon you. Allah is Kind and Merciful.
024|021|O you who believe, don’t follow Satan’s footsteps. Whoever follows Satan’s footsteps—he orders immorality and what’s objectionable. If not for Allah’s grace and mercy upon you, none of you would ever be purified. But Allah purifies whom He wills. Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.
024|022|And let those of abundance and ample means among you not swear to withhold their help from their relatives, the needy, and the emigrants in the cause of Allah. Let them forgive and overlook. Don’t you wish for Allah to forgive you? Allah is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful.
024|023|Those who falsely accuse innocent, unsuspecting, believing women are cursed in this world and in the Hereafter, and for them is a terrible punishment.
024|024|On the Day when their own tongues, hands, and feet will testify against them as to what they used to do.
024|025|On that Day, Allah will settle their accounts in full, and they will know that Allah is the Evident Truth.
024|026|Wicked women are for wicked men, and evil men are for evil women. And good women are for good men, and virtuous men are for virtuous women. These are clear of what people say. For them, there is forgiveness and a generous provision.
024|027|O you who believe, don’t enter homes other than your own until you have sought permission and greeted its inhabitants. This is better for you, that you may be mindful.
024|028|If you find no one therein, don’t enter until your permission has been granted. If you’re asked to leave, then turn back. Allah is fully aware of what you do.
024|029|There is no fault in you for entering houses not inhabited, where there is convenience for you. Allah knows what you disclose and what you conceal.
024|030|Tell the believing men to lower their gaze and guard their privates. That is purer for them, and Allah fully knows what they do.
024|031|And tell the believing women to lower their gaze, to guard their chastity, and not to display their beauty beyond what appears thereof. They should draw their veils over their chests and not display their beauty except to their husbands, fathers, fathers-in-law, sons, stepsons, brothers, the sons of their sisters, female relatives, their dependents, male servants devoid of sexual desires, and children who are unaware of women’s nakedness. They shouldn’t stamp their feet to draw attention to their hidden beauty. O believers, turn to Allah in repentance, so you may succeed.
024|032|Marry off the singles among you, and the righteous among your male and female servants. If they are poor, Allah will enrich them from His bounty. Allah is Bountiful, All-Knowing.
024|033|Let those who don’t find marriage abstain, until Allah enriches them from His grace. If any of your servants desire literacy, provide it, if you recognize any good in them. Give them from the wealth that Allah has given you. Don’t compel your maids into prostitution for worldly gains if they wish to remain virtuous. However, if anyone compels them, then after their compulsion, Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
024|034|We’ve sent down to you clear signs, narratives of those who preceded you, and an admonition for the righteous.
024|035|Allah is the Light of the heavens and the earth. His light is like a niche in which there is a lamp. The lamp is encased in a crystal, glowing like a brilliant star, fueled by a blessed olive tree, neither of the East nor the West. Its oil would almost glow, even without fire touching it—light upon light. Allah guides to His Light whom He wills. Allah presents parables for humankind.
024|036|In houses that Allah authorized to be raised His name is mentioned, and His praises are proclaimed, morning and evening.
024|037|Men, whom neither trade nor sale distracts from the remembrance of Allah, from performing prayers and giving charity. They fear a day when hearts and eyes will be overturned.
024|038|Allah will reward them for their best deeds and give them more from His grace. Allah provides without account for whom He wills.
024|039|But as for those who disbelieve, their deeds are like a mirage in a desert. The thirsty thinks it to be water, until, upon reaching it, finds nothing. Instead, he finds Allah there, to settle his account in full. Allah is swift in reckoning.
024|040|Or like darkness within a vast, deep sea, covered by wave upon wave, topped by clouds—layers upon layers of darkness. If one extends his hand, he can barely see it. For those whom Allah doesn’t grant light, there is no illumination.
024|041|Don’t you see that everything in the heavens and on earth glorifies Allah, including the birds, as they soar? Each knows its mode of prayer and praise. Allah is fully aware of what they do.
024|042|The sovereignty of the heavens and the earth belongs to Allah, and to Allah is the final return.
024|043|Didn’t you see how Allah drives the clouds, gathers them, then stacks them up? From within their midst, you see raindrops emerge. He sends down abundant hail from the sky, striking with it whom He wills and averting it from whom He wills. The flash of its lightning almost snatches away the sight.
024|044|Allah alternates the night and the day. In this, there is a lesson for those who have insight.
024|045|Allah created every living creature from water—some crawl on their bellies, some walk on two legs, and others on four. Allah creates whatever He wills, for He is capable of all things.
024|046|We revealed enlightening revelations, and Allah guides whom He wills to a straight path.
024|047|They say, “We believe in Allah and the Messenger, and we obey.” But after that, some of them turn away; these are not believers.
024|048|When they are called to Allah and His Messenger to judge among them, some of them hesitate.
024|049|However, if the judgment is in their favor, they come to it willingly.
024|050|Is there illness in their hearts? Or are they plagued with doubt? Or do they fear that Allah and His Messenger will mistreat them? In reality, it is they who are the wrongdoers.
024|051|When called upon by Allah and His Messenger to settle their disputes, the believers respond, saying, “We heard, and we obeyed.” These are the ones who will prosper.
024|052|Those who obey Allah and His Messenger, who fear Allah and are mindful of Him, are the successful ones.
024|053|They swear solemnly by Allah that they would mobilize if you were to command them. Say, “Don’t swear; true obedience will be recognized. Allah is fully aware of what you do.”
024|054|Say, “Obey Allah and obey the Messenger.” But if they turn away, he is accountable for his duty, and you are accountable for yours. If you obey, you will be guided. It is only incumbent upon the Messenger to deliver the clear message.
024|055|Allah promises those among you who believe and do good deeds that He will grant them sovereignty on earth, as He did to those before them. And He will establish for them their religion, which He has preferred for them, and replace their fear with security. They will worship Me alone, not associating anything with Me. However, those who disbelieve after this—these are the sinful.
024|056|Establish prayer, give charity, and obey the Messenger, so that you may receive mercy.
024|057|Don’t think that those who disbelieve can escape on earth. Their final abode is the Fire—a terrible destination.
024|058|O you who believe, let your dependents and those who haven’t reached puberty ask for permission in three instances: before the dawn prayer, when you undress at noon, and after the evening prayer. These are three occasions of privacy for you. At other times, it’s not improper for you or them to move about freely, mingling with each other. Thus, Allah clarifies His verses for you. Allah is All-Knowing, Most Wise.
024|059|When your children reach puberty, they must also ask for permission, as those before them did. Thus, Allah makes His commandments clear to you. Allah is All-Knowing, Most Wise.
024|060|Elderly women who are past the prospect of marriage can relax their dress code, provided they don’t flaunt their beauty. However, it’s better for them to maintain modesty. Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.
024|061|There is no blame on the blind, the disabled, the sick, nor upon yourselves if you eat in your own houses, or the houses of your fathers, mothers, brothers, sisters, paternal uncles and aunts, maternal uncles and aunts, or in houses whose keys you possess, or in your friends’ houses. There is no blame upon you whether you eat together or separately. When you enter houses, greet each other with a greeting blessed and pure from Allah. Thus, Allah clarifies His revelations to you, so you may understand.
024|062|True believers are those who have faith in Allah and His Messenger, and when they are with him on a matter of common interest, they don’t leave without seeking his permission. Those who ask your permission are the ones who believe in Allah and His Messenger. If they request your permission for some of their affairs, grant permission to whomever you wish among them, and ask Allah for forgiveness for them. Allah is Ever Forgiving, Most Merciful.
024|063|Don’t address the Messenger as you address each other. Allah surely knows those of you who slip away hiding themselves. Let those who defy His commands beware, lest a trial befall them or a grievous penalty be inflicted on them.
024|064|Surely, to Allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth. He knows what you’re upon. On the Day they are returned to Him, He will make them aware of what they did. And Allah is fully aware of everything.
025|001|Blessed is He who revealed the Criterion upon His servant, serving as a Warner to the worlds.
025|002|He to whom belongs the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth, who has not begotten a son, who has no partner in His dominion, and who created everything and ordained its destiny.
025|003|Yet, they choose gods other than Him that create nothing but are themselves created, possess no power to harm or benefit themselves, and cannot control death, life, or resurrection.
025|004|The unbelievers say, “This is nothing but a lie he lied, and others have helped him with it.” They committed an injustice and a falsehood.
025|005|They also say, “Legends of the ancients, which he wrote down, and they are being dictated to him morning and evening.”
025|006|Respond, “It was revealed by He who knows the secrets of the heavens and the earth. Indeed, He is Forgiving, Merciful.”
025|007|They ask, “What sort of messenger is this, who eats food and walks in the markets? Why wasn’t an angel sent down to be a co-warner with him?”
025|008|Or they ask, “Why wasn’t a treasure dropped on him?” Or, “Why doesn’t he have a garden from which he eats?” The wrongdoers also say, “You are only following a man who is bewitched.”
025|009|See how they make comparisons for you; they are astray and can’t find a way.
025|010|Blessed is He, who, if He wills, can give you better than that: Gardens through which rivers flow, and He will give you palaces.
025|011|They deny the Hour, and for those who deny the Hour, We prepared a scorching fire.
025|012|When it sees them from a distant place, they will hear its fury and roaring.
025|013|When they are thrown into a narrow place, bound in chains, they will plead for annihilation there and then.
025|014|“Don’t plead for a single annihilation today, but plead for many annihilations.”
025|015|Say, “Is that better, or the Eternal Garden, which is promised to the righteous?” It will be their reward and final destination.
025|016|There, they will have all they desire, forever. This is a promise binding upon your Lord.
025|017|On the Day He gathers them and whatever they worshiped besides Allah, He will ask, “Was it you who misled these servants of Mine, or did they stray from the path themselves?”
025|018|They will respond, “Glory be to You! It wasn’t for us to take any allies besides You. You gave them and their ancestors pleasures, until they forgot the Remembrance and became a ruined people.”
025|019|Thus, they will deny you because of what you say, and you won’t be able to avert or help. Whoever among you commits wrongdoing, We will make him taste a severe punishment.
025|020|We never sent messengers before you who didn’t eat food and walk in the markets. We test you through each other—will you have patience? Your Lord is ever Watchful.
025|021|Those who don’t anticipate Our meeting say, “If only the angels were sent down to us, or we could see our Lord.” They’ve grown inwardly arrogant, and have come with great arrogance.
025|022|On the Day they see the angels, there will be no joy for the transgressors, and they will exclaim, “This is an insurmountable barrier!”
025|023|We will then turn to the deeds they’ve committed and reduce them to scattered dust.
025|024|On that Day, the inhabitants of Paradise will have the best residence, and the finest place of rest.
025|025|On the Day when the sky and its clouds are ripped apart, the angels descend in continuous streams.
025|026|On that Day, sovereignty will belong to the Most Merciful. It will be a difficult Day for the disbelievers.
025|027|On that Day, the wrongdoer will bite on his hands in despair, he will say, “I wish I had taken a path with the Messenger.
025|028|Alas, for me! I wish I had never taken so-and-so as a friend.
025|029|He led me away from the Reminder after it had reached me. Satan has always been a betrayer of man.”
025|030|The Messenger will say, “O my Lord, my people have treated this Quran as something to be disregarded.”
025|031|For every prophet, We assigned adversaries from among the guilty. Yet, your Lord is sufficient as a Guide and Helper.
025|032|The disbelievers question, “Why wasn’t the Quran revealed to him all at once?” It was thus, to strengthen your heart, that We revealed it in stages.
025|033|They can’t bring you any argument, but We bring you the truth and the best explanation.
025|034|Those who are dragged face down to Hell, are in the worst position, and are most astray from the path.
025|035|We gave Moses the Scripture and appointed his brother Aaron as his assistant.
025|036|We instructed, “Go to the people who denied Our signs.” Then, We destroyed them utterly.
025|037|And the people of Noah—when they rejected the messengers, We drowned them, and made them a sign for all people. For the wrongdoers, We prepared a severe punishment.
025|038|And Aad, Thamud, the inhabitants of Rass, and many generations in between.
025|039|We presented each of them with parables, and then We obliterated them completely.
025|040|They passed by the town that was drenched by the terrible downpour. Didn’t they see it? Yet, they don’t expect resurrection.
025|041|When they see you, they mock, “Is this the one whom Allah has sent as a messenger?”
025|042|“He almost led us away from our gods, had we not firmly adhered to them.” They will realize, when they witness the punishment, who strayed further.
025|043|Have you considered the one who makes his own desire his god? Can you be responsible for him?
025|044|Do you think that most of them hear or understand? They are like cattle; in fact, they are even further astray from the path.
025|045|Didn’t you see how your Lord causes the shadow to extend? Had He willed, He could’ve made it still. And We made the sun its indicator.
025|046|Then We retract it towards Us in gradual stages.
025|047|It is He who made the night a covering for you, sleep for rest, and the day a revival.
025|048|It is He who sends the winds as heralds ahead of His mercy, and We send down from the sky pure water.
025|049|To revive dead lands thereby and to provide drink for the multitude of creatures and humans We created.
025|050|We distribute it among them for reflection, yet most people persist in ingratitude and disbelief.
025|051|Had We willed, We could’ve sent a warner to every community.
025|052|So don’t obey the unbelievers, but strive against them vigorously.
025|053|He is the one who has released two bodies of water, one sweet and fresh, the other salty and bitter. He set a barrier and a prohibitive partition between them.
025|054|It is He who created man from water, then made him relation by lineage and marriage. Your Lord is always Capable.
025|055|Yet, they worship entities other than Allah, which can neither benefit nor harm them. The disbeliever is in open defiance of his Lord.
025|056|We sent you only to deliver good news and to issue warnings.
025|057|Say, “I ask of you no recompense for this, except for whoever chooses to follow a path to his Lord.”
025|058|Put your trust in the Ever-Living One who never dies, and celebrate His praises. He is sufficient as the Well-Aware of the sins of his servants.
025|059|He who created the heavens, the earth, and everything between them in six periods, then established Himself above the Throne—the Most Gracious. So ask about Him a well informed.
025|060|When told to prostrate before the Merciful, they ask, “Who is this Merciful? Should we prostrate before whatever you command us?” And it intensifies their defiance.
025|061|Blessed is He who placed constellations in the heavens, and set therein a radiant lamp and a luminous moon.
025|062|He who made the night and the day follow each other—for anyone who wishes to reflect or express gratitude.
025|063|The servants of the Most Gracious are those who walk gently upon the earth, and when the ignorant address them, they respond with words of peace.
025|064|Those who spend the night before their Lord, prostrating and standing.
025|065|Those who pray, “Our Lord, avert from us the torment of Hell, for its suffering is persistent.
025|066|It is a dreadful dwelling and resting place.”
025|067|Those who, when they spend, are neither wasteful nor stingy, but are moderate.
025|068|Those who don’t invoke any other god alongside Allah, nor take a life which Allah has sanctified—except in the pursuit of justice—nor commit adultery. Whoever does these will face penalties.
025|069|The punishment will be doubled for him on Resurrection Day, and he will remain therein, humiliated.
025|070|Except for those who repent, believe, and work righteousness—for them, Allah will change their misdeeds into good ones. Allah is Ever Forgiving, Most Merciful.
025|071|Whoever repents and acts righteously has turned to Allah in repentance.
025|072|Those who don’t bear false witness, and when they come across vain talk, they pass by with dignity.
025|073|Those who, when reminded of their Lord’s verses, don’t fall upon them deaf and blind.
025|074|Those who pray, “Our Lord, from our spouses and offspring, make our eyes delightful, and make us exemplary for the righteous.”
025|075|These will be rewarded with the Chamber for their patience, where they will be received with greetings and words of peace.
025|076|They will dwell therein forever. What an excellent abode and resting place it is!
025|077|Say, “What significance would you hold with my Lord if not for your prayers? You’ve denied, so the inevitable will come.”
026|001|Ta. Seen. Meem.
026|002|These are the verses of the Book that makes things clear.
026|003|You may be grieving because they don’t believe.
026|004|If We will, We could send down upon them a sign from the heavens, so their necks would bow in submission.
026|005|Whenever a new revelation comes to them from the Most Merciful, they turn away in denial.
026|006|They denied the truth, but soon, the news of what they mocked will reach them.
026|007|Don’t they observe the earth and the myriad of diverse and unique species We produced upon it?
026|008|In this are signs, but most of them aren’t believers.
026|009|Your Lord is the Exalted in Might, the Merciful.
026|010|When your Lord called Moses: “Go to the oppressive people.
026|011|The people of Pharaoh. Won’t they fear and reform?”
026|012|He replied, “My Lord, I fear they might reject me.
026|013|And my chest tightens, and my speech stutters. Therefore, send Aaron with me.
026|014|They hold an accusation against me, and I’m afraid they might kill me.”
026|015|“No,” He responded, “Go, both of you, with Our signs. We are with you, listening.
026|016|Go to Pharaoh and say, ‘We are the messengers of the Lord of the worlds.
026|017|Release the Children of Israel with us.’”
026|018|He responded, “Didn’t we raise you among us as a child, and you stayed among us for years of your life?
026|019|And yet, you did what you did, and you were ungrateful.”
026|020|“I did it,” he confessed, “when I was misguided.
026|021|I fled from you when I feared you. But my Lord gave me wisdom and appointed me as one of the messengers.
026|022|Is this the favor of which you remind me—that you’ve enslaved the Children of Israel?”
026|023|Pharaoh said, “And who is this ‘Lord of the worlds’?”
026|024|He replied, “The Lord of the heavens and the earth, and everything between them, if you could be certain.”
026|025|He then addressed those around him, “Did you hear this?”
026|026|He said, “Your Lord and the Lord of your ancient ancestors.”
026|027|He said, “Your messenger who was sent to you is delusional.”
026|028|He responded, “The Lord of the East and the West and all that’s between, if you would use reason.”
026|029|He threatened, “If you take a god other than me, I will surely imprison you.”
026|030|He countered, “What if I brought you something convincing?”
026|031|He challenged, “Then bring it, if you are truthful.”
026|032|So he threw down his staff, and it instantly transformed into a striking serpent.
026|033|Then drew out his hand, and lo and behold, it was radiant to the observers.
026|034|He said to the chiefs around him, “This man is a proficient magician.
026|035|He seeks to expel you from your land with his magic. What do you command?”
026|036|They suggested, “Delay him and his brother and send recruiters to the cities.
026|037|To summon to you every accomplished magician.”
026|038|The magicians were thus gathered at the appointed time on the designated day.
026|039|And the people were notified, “Are you going to assemble?
026|040|Perhaps we will follow the magicians if they are the victors.”
026|041|Upon their arrival, the magicians asked Pharaoh, “Will we be rewarded if we prevail?”
026|042|He replied, “Indeed, and you will be counted among those near me.”
026|043|Moses then said to them, “Present whatever you’re going to present.”
026|044|And they threw their ropes and staffs, proclaiming, “By Pharaoh’s might, it is us who will prevail.”
026|045|Then Moses threw his staff, and behold, it started swallowing what they had fabricated.
026|046|The sorcerers fell down in prostration.
026|047|Declaring, “We have believed in the Lord of the worlds.
026|048|The Lord of Moses and Aaron.”
026|049|He said, “How dare you believe in Him before I gave you permission! He is your chief who taught you magic. But you will soon know. I will cut off your hands and feet on opposite sides, and I will crucify you all.”
026|050|They said, “No harm, we are returning to our Lord anyway.
026|051|We aspire that our Lord will forgive our sins, as we are among the first believers.”
026|052|We then revealed to Moses: “Depart with My servants at night, and expect pursuit.”
026|053|Pharaoh then dispatched messengers throughout the cities:
026|054|“These people are just a small gang.
026|055|Yet, they provoked our wrath.
026|056|But we are a united and vigilant multitude.”
026|057|Thus, We drove them out of gardens and springs.
026|058|And from treasured, luxurious homes.
026|059|Thus it was, and We passed it to the Children of Israel.
026|060|And they pursued them towards the east.
026|061|When the two groups sighted each other, Moses’ companions said, “We are certainly being overtaken!”
026|062|He replied, “Never! My Lord is with me, He will guide me.”
026|063|We then revealed to Moses, “Strike the sea with your staff.” And it parted, and each side was like a towering mountain.
026|064|We then drew the others near.
026|065|Thus, We rescued Moses and all those with him.
026|066|Then We drowned the others.
026|067|There is a lesson in this, but most of them aren’t believers.
026|068|Certainly, your Lord is the Almighty, the Most Merciful.
026|069|Relate to them the story of Abraham.
026|070|When he asked his father and his people, “What do you worship?”
026|071|They replied, “We worship idols, to which we are fervently devoted.”
026|072|He asked, “Can they hear you when you pray to them?
026|073|Can they benefit you or harm you?”
026|074|They responded, “But this is what we found our ancestors doing.”
026|075|He then challenged, “Did you ever consider what you worship?
026|076|You and your ancient forefathers?
026|077|They are enemies to me; but not so the Lord of the Worlds.
026|078|He who created me, and it is He who guides me.
026|079|He who provides me with food and drink.
026|080|And when I fall ill, it’s He who heals me.
026|081|He who causes me to die, then revives me.
026|082|And He, in whom I aspire, will forgive my sins on Judgment Day.”
026|083|“My Lord, grant me wisdom and include me among the righteous.
026|084|And grant me a reputation of truthfulness among the later generations.
026|085|And grant me a place among the inheritors of the Garden of Bliss.
026|086|And forgive my father, for he was of the lost.
026|087|And don’t disgrace me on the Day they are resurrected.
026|088|The Day when neither wealth nor children will benefit anyone.
026|089|Except for those who come to Allah with a pure heart.”
026|090|And Paradise will be brought near to the righteous.
026|091|And Hellfire will be unveiled for the deviants.
026|092|And it will be asked, “Where are those you used to worship?
026|093|Besides Allah? Can they help you, or help themselves?”
026|094|They will be flung into it, they and the deceitful.
026|095|And all of the forces of evil.
026|096|They will be bickering therein, saying.
026|097|“By Allah, we were in manifest error.
026|098|When we equated you with the Lord of the worlds.
026|099|It was only the transgressors who misled us.
026|100|Now, we have no intercessors.
026|101|And no loyal friend.
026|102|If only we had another chance, so that we could be believers.”
026|103|There is a lesson in this, but most of them aren’t believers.
026|104|Your Lord, indeed, is the Almighty, the Most Merciful.
026|105|The people of Noah denied the messengers.
026|106|When their brother Noah said to them, “Will you not embrace righteousness?
026|107|I am a trustworthy messenger to you.
026|108|So fear Allah, and obey me.
026|109|I ask no compensation from you; my recompense is only from the Lord of the worlds.
026|110|So Fear Allah, and obey me.”
026|111|They responded, “Should we believe in you, when the lowest class follows you?”
026|112|He replied, “I have no knowledge of what they’ve been doing.
026|113|Their account is only with my Lord, if you could perceive.
026|114|And I am not going to drive away the believers.
026|115|I am only a clear warner.”
026|116|They warned, “Noah, if you don’t stop, you will be stoned.”
026|117|He pleaded, “My Lord, my people have rejected me.
026|118|Judge decisively between me and them, and rescue me and the believers with me.”
026|119|So We saved him and those with him in the laden Ark.
026|120|Then, We drowned the others.
026|121|There is a lesson in this, but most of them aren’t believers.
026|122|Indeed your Lord—He is the Almighty, the Merciful.
026|123|Aad denied the messengers.
026|124|When their brother Hud implored them, “Won’t you exercise restraint?
026|125|I am a trustworthy messenger to you.
026|126|So, revere Allah, and obey me.
026|127|I ask no reward from you; my recompense is only from the Lord of the worlds.
026|128|You erect monuments on every hill in vanity.
026|129|And you build strongholds, as if you will live forever.
026|130|And when you strike, you strike mercilessly.
026|131|So fear Allah, and obey me.
026|132|Fear Him who supplied you with what you know.
026|133|He provided you with livestock and offspring.
026|134|And gardens, and springs.
026|135|I fear for you the punishment of a tremendous day.”
026|136|They responded, “It makes no difference to us whether you lecture us or not.
026|137|This is nothing but the traditions of the ancients.
026|138|And we are not to be punished.”
026|139|They disbelieved him, and so We destroyed them. There is a lesson in this, but most of them aren’t believers.
026|140|Your Lord is the Exalted in Might, the Most Merciful.
026|141|Thamud denied the messengers.
026|142|When their brother Saleh said to them, “Will you not behave righteously?
026|143|I am a reliable messenger to you.
026|144|So, fear Allah and obey me.
026|145|I ask for no reward from you; my recompense is only from the Lord of the worlds.
026|146|Won’t you be secure in this?
026|147|In gardens and springs?
026|148|In fields and palm trees with tender and delicate shoots?
026|149|In skillfully carved homes within the mountains?
026|150|So Fear Allah, and obey me.
026|151|And don’t obey the command of the extravagant.
026|152|Those who spread corruption in the land and don’t reform.”
026|153|They replied, “You are under an enchantment.
026|154|You are just a human like us; so bring a sign, if you are truthful.”
026|155|He said, “This is a she-camel. She has her turn of drinking, and you have yours—each on a known day.
026|156|And don’t harm her, lest you be overtaken by the punishment of a terrible day.”
026|157|However, they hamstrung her, and then became regretful.
026|158|So, the punishment seized them. There is a lesson in this, but most of them aren’t believers.
026|159|Your Lord is the Mighty, the Merciful.
026|160|The people of Lot denied the messengers.
026|161|When their brother Lot exhorted them, “Won’t you behave righteously?
026|162|I am a credible messenger to you.
026|163|So fear Allah, and obey me.
026|164|I ask no reward from you; my reward is only from the Lord of the realms.
026|165|Do you approach the males of the world?
026|166|And abandon the wives that your Lord created for you? But you are a transgressing people.”
026|167|They replied, “If you don’t stop, O Lot, you will be among those expelled.”
026|168|He responded, “I am of those who disapprove of your conduct.”
026|169|“My Lord, save me and my family from their actions.”
026|170|And so, We rescued him and his entire family.
026|171|Except an elderly woman among those who stayed behind.
026|172|Then We destroyed the others.
026|173|And We rained down on them a downpour. What an awful rain for the forewarned!
026|174|There is a sign in this, but most of them aren’t believers.
026|175|Your Lord is the Almighty, the Merciful.
026|176|The inhabitants of the Forest denied the messengers.
026|177|When Shuaib pleaded with them, “Will you not embrace righteousness?
026|178|I am a trustworthy messenger to you.
026|179|So fear Allah, obey me.
026|180|I ask no payment from you; my payment is only from the Lord of the cosmos.
026|181|Give full measure and don’t shortchange.
026|182|And weigh with an even scale.
026|183|And don’t defraud people of their rights or commit abuse on earth.
026|184|And fear the One who created you and the earlier generations.”
026|185|They responded, “You are surely among the bewitched.
026|186|You are but a man like us, and we think you are a liar.
026|187|Bring down upon us chunks of the sky, if you are truthful.”
026|188|He responded, “My Lord is more aware of your actions.”
026|189|They disbelieved him, so the punishment of the Day of the Shadow befell them: a day of immense suffering.
026|190|In that is a sign, yet most of them refuse to believe.
026|191|Your Lord is the Almighty, the Merciful.
026|192|This is a revelation from the Lord of the universes.
026|193|The Trustworthy Spirit came down with it.
026|194|Upon your heart, so you may be among the warners.
026|195|In clear Arabic language.
026|196|And it was foretold in the scriptures of old.
026|197|Is it not a sign for them that the scholars among the Children of Israel recognize it?
026|198|Even if We had revealed it to a foreigner.
026|199|And he had recited it to them, they still wouldn’t have believed it.
026|200|Thus, We caused it to enter the hearts of the criminals.
026|201|They won’t believe in it until they see the severe torment.
026|202|It will come upon them unexpectedly, while they are unaware.
026|203|Then, they will exclaim, “Could we be given more time?”
026|204|Are they trying to expedite Our punishment?
026|205|Consider this: even if We were to grant them enjoyment for years.
026|206|Then, what they were promised will come upon them.
026|207|All their enjoyed comforts won’t avail them.
026|208|Never did We destroy a town, but it had its warners.
026|209|As a reminder, for We were never unjust.
026|210|It is not revealed by the devils.
026|211|It is neither in their interest nor within their power.
026|212|They are barred from hearing.
026|213|So don’t call upon any other god with Allah, lest you be among the tormented.
026|214|And warn your close kin.
026|215|And be lenient with those who followed you amongst the believers.
026|216|If they disobey you, say, “I am innocent of what you do.”
026|217|And rely on the Almighty, the Most Merciful.
026|218|Who sees you when you stand.
026|219|And your movement among those who bow down.
026|220|He is the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing.
026|221|Should I inform you upon whom the devils descend?
026|222|They descend upon every sinful liar.
026|223|They lend an ear, but most of them are liars.
026|224|As for the poets, the deviators follow them.
026|225|Don’t you see how they ramble in every style?
026|226|And that they say what they don’t do?
026|227|Except for those who believe, perform good deeds, remember Allah frequently, and defend themselves after being wronged. Those who do wrong will soon learn how they will be overturned.
027|001|Ta. Seen. These are the verses of the Quran—a clear and enlightening Scripture.
027|002|A guide and good news to the believers.
027|003|Those who establish prayer, give the purifying charity, and have firm belief in the Hereafter.
027|004|For those who don’t believe in the Hereafter, We make their deeds appear attractive to them, so they wander aimlessly.
027|005|These will suffer the worst punishment, and in the Hereafter, they will be the most significant losers.
027|006|You are receiving the Quran from the One who is All-Wise, All-Knowing.
027|007|When Moses said to his family, “I noticed a fire. I will bring you news from it, or a burning torch to warm yourselves.”
027|008|As he approached it, he was called, “Blessed is whoever is at the fire and whoever is around it, and glory be to Allah, the Lord of the worlds.
027|009|O Moses, it is I, Allah, the Almighty, the All-Wise.
027|010|Lay down your staff.” As he saw it moving like a serpent, he turned to flee. “O Moses, fear not; the messengers don’t fear in My presence.
027|011|However, anyone who does wrong and then replaces it with good—I am Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.
027|012|Now, insert your hand into your cloak; it will come out white and flawless. These are among nine signs for Pharaoh and his people. They are sinful people.”
027|013|When Our signs were presented to them, they said, “This is nothing but obvious magic.”
027|014|They denied them unjustly and arrogantly, despite their inner selves being convinced of them. Observe, then, the end of the corruptors.
027|015|We granted knowledge to David and Solomon. They said, “Praise be to Allah, who has favored us over many of His believing servants.”
027|016|Solomon succeeded David. He said, “O people, we were taught the language of birds, and we were given a share of everything. Indeed, these are the evident blessings.”
027|017|And gathered for Solomon were his troops of jinn, men, and birds—all held in strict order.
027|018|Upon reaching the Valley of the Ants, an ant warned, “O ants, retreat to your dwellings, lest Solomon and his troops inadvertently crush you.”
027|019|Amused by her words, he laughed and prayed, “My Lord, enable me to be thankful for the blessings You’ve bestowed upon me and my parents, and to perform righteous deeds that please You. And by Your mercy, include me among Your righteous servants.”
027|020|He surveyed the birds and said, “What’s amiss that I don’t see the hoopoe? Could he be among the absentees?
027|021|I will punish him severely or even slay him, unless he brings me a valid explanation.”
027|022|But he didn’t take long to return and said, “I have discovered what you didn’t know. I’ve come to you from Sheba with certain news.
027|023|I found a woman ruling over them, endowed with every requisite, and she possesses a magnificent throne.
027|024|I found her and her people prostrating to the sun instead of Allah. Satan made their deeds appear pleasing to them, thus diverting them from the path, so they are not guided.
027|025|Shouldn’t they prostrate to Allah, who brings out the hidden in the heavens and the earth, and knows what you conceal and what you disclose?
027|026|Allah—there is no deity except He, the Lord of the Majestic Throne.”
027|027|He responded, “We will see whether you told the truth or were lying.
027|028|Take this letter of mine, deliver it to them, then withdraw from them and see what their response will be.”
027|029|She said, “O council, I have been delivered a noble letter.
027|030|It is from Solomon, and it is ‘In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.’
027|031|‘Don’t exalt yourselves above me, but come to me in submission.’”
027|032|She continued, “O my counselors, advise me in this matter. I don’t make a decision without your counsel.”
027|033|They responded, “We possess power and great military might, but the command is yours to decide. Consider what you will command.”
027|034|She said, “When kings enter a city, they ruin it and humiliate its noble citizens. Such is their way.
027|035|I will send them a gift and await what the messengers will return.”
027|036|Upon receiving it, Solomon said, “Are you offering me money? What Allah gave me is far better than what He gave you. It is you who rejoice in your gift.
027|037|Return to them; we will come at them with forces they can’t resist, and we will expel them from there, humiliated and belittled.”
027|038|He asked, “O nobles, who among you can bring me her throne before they come to me in submission?”
027|039|A powerful jinn responded, “I can bring it to you before you rise from your place. I am strong and trustworthy enough to do it.”
027|040|The one who had knowledge of the Scripture suggested, “I can bring it to you before you can blink.” When Solomon saw it placed before him, he exclaimed, “This is by the grace of my Lord, to test whether I am grateful or ungrateful. Whoever gives thanks, he gives thanks for his own good. And whoever is ungrateful—my Lord is Free of need and Generous.”
027|041|He said, “Alter her throne for her; we shall see whether she will be guided or she will be one of those not guided.”
027|042|Upon her arrival, she was asked, “Does your throne resemble this one?” She replied, “As if it were the same.” “We were given knowledge beforehand, and we have already submitted.”
027|043|What she was worshiping besides Allah had prevented her. She was from a disbelieving people.
027|044|She was directed to enter the palace. Upon seeing it, she mistook it for a pool and bared her legs. He said, “It is a courtyard paved with glass.” She said, “My Lord, I have wronged myself, and I submit with Solomon, to Allah—Lord of the worlds.”
027|045|To Thamud, We sent their brother Saleh: “Worship Allah.” Yet, they became two quarreling factions.
027|046|He pleaded, “O my people, why do you hasten towards evil rather than good? Why not ask for Allah’s forgiveness, so you may receive mercy.”
027|047|They responded, “We see ill omens in you and those with you.” He replied, “Your omens are determined by Allah; you are a people being tested.”
027|048|In the city were nine individuals who made mischief in the land and didn’t reform.
027|049|They conspired, “Let us swear by Allah to attack him and his family under the cover of night. Then, we will tell his guardian that we didn’t know of his family’s demise; we are telling the truth.”
027|050|And they plotted a conspiracy, and We plotted a conspiracy, while they were unaware.
027|051|Consider the outcome of their scheming: We obliterated them and their entire community.
027|052|Their homes now lie deserted due to their wrongdoings, a clear sign for those who understand.
027|053|And We saved those who believed and led righteous lives.
027|054|Lot admonished his people, “Do you openly commit such indecencies?
027|055|Do you approach men with lust instead of women? You are a people acting ignorantly.”
027|056|But the answer of his people was nothing more than, “Drive Lot’s family out of your town. They are people who want to stay pure!”
027|057|So, We rescued him and his family, except for his wife, whom We destined to be among those left behind.
027|058|Then We rained down on them a torrent. How terrible was the rain for the forewarned!
027|059|Say, “Praise be to Allah, and peace be upon His chosen servants. Is Allah better, or what they associate with Him?”
027|060|Who created the heavens and the earth, and sent down water from the sky for you, with which We cultivate delightful gardens, the likes of which you couldn’t have grown? Is there a god along with Allah? They are people who equate.
027|061|Who made the earth a stable home, set rivers through it, placed firm mountains, and created a barrier between the two seas? Is there a god along with Allah? Yet, most of them don’t know.
027|062|Who responds to the distressed when he calls upon Him, alleviates affliction, and makes you inheritors of the earth? Is there a god along with Allah? Yet, you reflect little.
027|063|Who guides you through the darkness on land and sea, and sends winds heralding His mercy? Is there a god along with Allah? Allah is far beyond what they associate.
027|064|Who initiates the creation, repeats it, and provides for you from the sky and the earth? Is there a god along with Allah? Say, “Present your evidence, if you are truthful.”
027|065|Say, “None in the heavens and the earth knows the unseen, except for Allah, and they don’t perceive when they will be resurrected.”
027|066|Their understanding of the Hereafter is obscure; they are skeptical about it, and they are blind to it.
027|067|Those who disbelieve say, “When we and our ancestors become dust, will we be resurrected?
027|068|We and our ancestors were promised this before; these are nothing but legends of the ancients.”
027|069|Say, “Roam the earth and see the fate that befell the wrongdoers.”
027|070|Don’t grieve for them, nor be distressed by their schemes.
027|071|They ask, “When will this promise come to pass, if you are truthful?”
027|072|Reply, “It may be that what you wish to hasten is already near you.”
027|073|Your Lord is generous towards people, yet most of them don’t express gratitude.
027|074|Surely your Lord knows what their hearts hide and what they reveal.
027|075|There is nothing concealed in the heavens or on the earth that is not in a clear record.
027|076|This Quran clarifies many of the disagreements amongst the Children of Israel.
027|077|Furthermore, it is a guide and a mercy to the believers.
027|078|Your Lord will judge among them by His wisdom. He is the Mighty, the All-Knowing.
027|079|Therefore, put your trust in Allah. You are on the path of apparent truth.
027|080|You can’t make the dead hear, nor can you make the deaf hear the call when they retreat.
027|081|You can’t guide the blind out of their errancy. You can make none hear except those who believe in Our revelations; they are in submission.
027|082|When the Decree is issued against them, We will produce for them a creature from the earth that will speak to them because people had no faith in Our signs.
027|083|On the Day we will gather from every community a group of those who denied Our revelations, they will be marshaled.
027|084|When they arrive, He will say, “Did you reject My verses without understanding them, or what exactly were you doing?”
027|085|The Decree will befall them due to their wrongdoings, rendering them speechless.
027|086|Don’t they contemplate how We created the night so they can rest and the day for visibility? In this are signs for those who believe.
027|087|On the Day when the Trumpet will be blown, and everyone in the heavens and everyone on earth will be terrified, except those whom Allah wills. Everyone will come humbly submissive before Him.
027|088|You see the mountains, and you think they are fixed, but they pass, as the passing of the clouds. The making of Allah, who perfected everything; He is fully aware of everything you do.
027|089|Whoever brings a good deed, he will have better than it, and they will be secure from terror on that day.
027|090|But those who commit evil deeds, their faces will be thrown into the Fire. Are you recompensed except for what you used to do?
027|091|“I have been commanded only to worship the Lord of this town, Who has declared it sacred, and to Whom all things belong. And I am commanded to be of those who submit.
027|092|And to convey the Quran.” Whoever is guided, is only guided for his soul. As for those who go astray, then say, “I am only a warner.”
027|093|And say, “Praise be to Allah, He will show you His signs, and you will recognize them. Your Lord is not unaware of what you do.”
028|001|Ta. Seen. Meem.
028|002|These are the verses of the Enlightening Book.
028|003|We narrate to you the story of Moses and Pharaoh, with truth, for a people who believe.
028|004|Pharaoh exalted himself in the land, dividing its people into sects. He oppressed a group among them, slaughtering their sons while sparing their women. He was among the corruptors.
028|005|Yet, We intended to show favor upon those oppressed in the land, and make them leaders, and make them the inheritors.
028|006|And to establish them in the land. And to show Pharaoh, Haman, and their troops from them what they were fearing.
028|007|We inspired Moses’ mother: “Suckle him, and if you fear for him, cast him into the river, and don’t fear nor grieve. We will return him to you and make him one of the messengers.”
028|008|Pharaoh’s family picked him up, unaware he would become their adversary and bring them sorrow. Pharaoh, Haman, and their troops were sinful.
028|009|Pharaoh’s wife said, “He is a delight to my eyes and yours. Don’t kill him; perhaps he may benefit us, or we may adopt him as a son.” However, they didn’t foresee.
028|010|The heart of Moses’ mother was filled with anxiety—she almost disclosed his identity, if We had not strengthened her heart, so that she could be among the believers.
028|011|And she said to his sister, “Follow him.” So she watched him from a distance while they perceived not.
028|012|And We had forbidden foster-mothers for him. She said, “Shall I point out to you a household that could look after him for you?”
028|013|And so, We returned him to his mother, to bring her joy, alleviate her sorrow, and reassure her that Allah’s promise is true. Yet, most of them don’t understand.
028|014|When he reached his full strength and was mature, We endowed him with wisdom and knowledge. This is how We reward the righteous.
028|015|One day, he entered the city unnoticed by its inhabitants. There, he found two men fighting—one from his sect and the other from his enemies. The man from his sect sought his help against the adversary, and Moses struck him, ending his life. He said, “This is the work of Satan; he is a clear enemy, leading astray.”
028|016|He prayed, “My Lord, I have wronged myself. Please forgive me.” And He forgave him. He is the Forgiving, the Merciful.
028|017|He pledged, “My Lord, by the favors You’ve bestowed upon me, I will never be a helper to the criminals.”
028|018|Afterward, he was vigilant in the city. The man who had sought his help the previous day was again crying out for his assistance. Moses said to him, ”You are clearly a troublemaker.”
028|019|And when he intended to strike the one from their enemy faction, he said, “O Moses, do you intend to kill me, as you killed a man yesterday? You only aim to become a tyrant in the land and not a peacemaker.”
028|020|A man came rushing from the city’s farthest part, exclaiming, “O Moses, the authorities are consulting to kill you. Leave immediately; I am advising you in good faith.”
028|021|So he departed from there, fearful and vigilant, saying, “My Lord, save me from the wrongdoing people.”
028|022|When he was heading towards Midian, he said, “Hopefully, my Lord will guide me to the right path.”
028|023|Upon reaching the water of Midian, he found a crowd of people watering. And he found, apart from them, two women keeping back. He asked, “What troubles you?” They replied, “We can’t water until the shepherds have finished, and our father is an elderly man.”
028|024|Then, he watered for them, then withdrew to the shade and said, “My Lord, I am in desperate need of whatever good You might send down to me.”
028|025|Later, one of the two women approached him, walking modestly. She said, “My father invites you so he may reward you for drawing water for us.” When he arrived and told him the story, he said, “Don’t fear. You’ve escaped from the unjust people.”
028|026|One of the women said, “My father, hire him! The best one to hire is the strong and trustworthy.”
028|027|He said, “I intend to wed you to one of my daughters, provided you serve me for eight years. If you complete ten, it is up to you. And I don’t intend to impose any hardship on you, and Allah willing, you’ll find me righteous.”
028|028|He responded, “That’s an agreement between us. Whichever of the two terms I fulfill, let there be no injustice towards me, and Allah is the guardian over what we say.”
028|029|After Moses had completed the term and was journeying with his family, he noticed a fire in the direction of the Mount. He told his family, “Stay here; I have noticed a fire. Perhaps I can bring back some news from it, or a burning ember to warm you.”
028|030|As he approached, he was called out from the right side of the valley, from the Blessed Spot, from within the tree, “O Moses, it is I, Allah, Lord of the worlds.”
028|031|“Drop your staff.” And when he saw it writhing, as if it were a serpent, he turned to flee and didn’t look back. “O Moses, approach and fear not—you are safe.
028|032|Insert your hand into your robe; it will come out white, without any blemish. And draw your arm toward yourself to ward off fear. These are two proofs from your Lord for Pharaoh and his chiefs; they are sinful people.”
028|033|He said, “My Lord, I have killed a man among them, so I fear that they will kill me.
028|034|And my brother Aaron; he is more fluent in speech than me. So send him with me as a helper to affirm my truth; I fear they will reject me.
028|035|He replied, “We will strengthen you with your brother, and We will grant both of you authority, so they can’t harm you. With Our signs, you and those who follow you will be victorious.”
028|036|But when Moses came to them with Our clear signs, they said, “This is nothing but fabricated magic; we’ve never heard of such from our forefathers.”
028|037|Moses responded, “My Lord knows best who brought guidance from Him, and to whom the ultimate home will belong. The wrongdoers won’t succeed.”
028|038|Pharaoh declared, “O my chiefs, I know of no other god for you than myself. Therefore, O Haman, fire up the clay for me, and build me a tower, that I may climb up to the God of Moses; though I am convinced he is lying.”
028|039|He and his troops behaved arrogantly in the land, without right, and they thought that they wouldn’t be returned to Us.
028|040|So, We seized him and his troops, throwing them into the sea. Observe the end of the wrongdoers!
028|041|And We appointed them leaders who call to the Fire, and on Resurrection Day, they won’t be helped.
028|042|And We followed them in this world with a curse, and they will be among the despised on Resurrection Day.
028|043|And We gave Moses the Scripture, after We had destroyed the former generations, as a beacon of light for humanity, offering guidance and mercy, so they might reflect.
028|044|You weren’t on the western side when We decreed the commandment to Moses, nor were you among the witnesses.
028|045|Yet, We raised numerous generations and extended their lifespans. You were not among the people of Midian, delivering Our verses to them. But, We have always sent messengers.
028|046|You weren’t at the base of the Mount when We called out. However, it’s an act of mercy from your Lord, to warn a people to whom no warner had come before, so they may become aware.
028|047|Thus, if a calamity befalls them due to their actions, they can’t say, “Our Lord, if only You had sent us a messenger, we would’ve followed Your guidance and been among the believers.”
028|048|Now, when the truth has come to them from Us, they argue, “Why wasn’t he given something similar to what Moses received?” Didn’t they reject what was previously given to Moses? And they say, “These two are mixed-up magic spells, and we reject both.”
028|049|Say, “Then produce a scripture from Allah that offers superior guidance than these two, and I will follow it, if you are truthful.”
028|050|If they fail to respond to you, know that they are merely following their desires. And who is more astray than one who follows his desires without guidance from Allah? Allah does not guide the wrongdoers.
028|051|We’ve conveyed the Word to them, so they may remember.
028|052|Those to whom We’ve given the Scripture before this, are believers in it.
028|053|When it’s conveyed to them, they assert, “We believe in it; it’s the truth from our Lord. Even before its revelation, we were already Submitters.”
028|054|These will be given their reward twice over, because they persevered. They fend off evil with good, and they spend out of what We’ve provided for them.
028|055|When they hear idle talk, they turn away from it, saying, “To us our deeds, and to you your deeds. Peace be upon you; we don’t engage with the ignorant.”
028|056|You can’t guide whom you love, but Allah guides whom He wills. He knows best those who are guided.
028|057|They argue, “If we follow the guidance with you, we will be displaced from our land.” Didn’t We establish for them a secure sanctuary, to which all kinds of fruits are brought, as sustenance from Us? Yet, most of them don’t understand.
028|058|How many a city did We destroy while they were arrogant in their luxury? These are their dwellings, uninhabited after them except a little; We are the Inheritor.
028|059|Your Lord never destroyed the towns until He has raised a messenger within them to relay to them Our revelations. We would never destroy a community unless its people were wrongdoers.
028|060|What you’ve been given is merely for the enjoyment and decoration of this worldly life. What Allah possesses, however, is superior and more lasting. Don’t you understand?
028|061|Is the one to whom We’ve promised a good promise—which he will attain—comparable to the one to whom We granted worldly pleasures, but who, on Resurrection Day, will be among the arraigned?
028|062|On that Day, He will call out to them, “Where are those ‘partners’ of Mine you claimed?”
028|063|Those against whom the word will come into effect, will say, “Our Lord, these are the ones we misled. We misled them as we ourselves were misled. We disassociate ourselves from them before You. It was not us whom they worshiped.”
028|064|Then it will be said, “Call upon your associates.” They will call upon them, but they won’t answer them. They will witness the suffering and wish they had followed guidance.
028|065|On that Day, He will question them, “What was your reply to the messengers?”
028|066|On that day, they will be blind to the news, and they won’t ask one another.
028|067|However, those who repent, believe, and perform righteous deeds may indeed be among the successful.
028|068|Your Lord creates what He wills, and He chooses. The choice isn’t theirs. Glory be to Allah, and High above what they associate with Him.
028|069|Your Lord knows what their hearts conceal and what they disclose.
028|070|He is Allah; there is no god except He. All praise is His in this life and the Hereafter. His is the judgment, and to Him you will be returned.
028|071|Say, “Have you considered: if Allah were to make the night continuous over you until Resurrection Day, which god, other than Allah, could bring you illumination? Don’t you listen?”
028|072|Say, “Have you considered: if Allah were to make the day continuous over you until Resurrection Day, which god, other than Allah, could bring you night for rest? Don’t you see?”
028|073|Out of His mercy, He made for you the night and the day, so you may rest therein, seek His bounty, and perhaps express gratitude.
028|074|On the Day He will summon them, He will question, “Where are those you alleged were My ‘partners’?”
028|075|We will extract from every nation a witness and say, “Present your evidence.” Then they will realize that the truth is Allah’s alone, and the lies they fabricated will abandon them.
028|076|Korah was of Moses’ people, but he oppressed them. We had given him such treasures, that their keys would burden a group of strong men. When his people said to him, “Don’t exult; Allah does not love the exultant.
028|077|Seek the Hereafter with what Allah has given you, and don’t neglect your share of this world. Do good, as Allah has done good to you, and refrain from causing corruption in the land. Allah doesn’t favor the corrupt.”
028|078|He replied, “I acquired all this through my knowledge.” Didn’t he know that Allah had destroyed before him generations that were mightier and wealthier than he was? But the sinful won’t be asked about their sins.
028|079|And he paraded before his people in his splendor. Those who seek this worldly life said, “If only we had the like of what Korah was given. Indeed, he is one of great fortune.”
028|080|But those who had been given knowledge said, “Woe to you! The reward from Allah is better for those who believe and act righteously, but only the patient will receive it.”
028|081|So, We made the earth swallow him and his mansion. There was no group to help him against Allah, nor could he defend himself.
028|082|Those who wished they were in his place the day before began to say, “Oh, how Allah extends provision to whom He wills of His servants and restricts it. Had Allah not been gracious to us, He would’ve caused the earth to swallow us. Oh, how the unbelievers don’t succeed.”
028|083|That Home of the Hereafter, We assign it to those who don’t seek superiority on earth, nor corruption. And the outcome is for the righteous.
028|084|Whoever comes with good will have what’s better. But whoever comes with evil—the evildoers will be recompensed only for what they’ve done.
028|085|He who ordained the Quran upon you, will bring you back to the place of return. Say, “My Lord knows best who comes with guidance and who is in manifest error.”
028|086|You didn’t expect the Scripture to be transmitted to you, but it is a mercy from your Lord. So, don’t be a supporter of unbelievers.
028|087|And let them not turn you away from Allah’s verses after they’ve been revealed to you. And invite to your Lord, and never be one of the idolaters.
028|088|And call not, besides Allah, unto any other god. There is no deity except Him. Everything will perish, except His presence. To Him is judgment, and to Him, you will be returned.
029|001|Alif. Lam. Meem.
029|002|Do people think they will be left alone, just stating, “We believe,” without being tested?
029|003|We tested those before them. And Allah will certainly know those who are true from those who are false.
029|004|Do those who commit evil think they can outmaneuver Us? How delusional they are!
029|005|Whoever hopes to meet Allah, the appointed time of Allah is surely coming. He is the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing.
029|006|Whoever strives, strives for his own soul. Allah is free of all needs from all creation.
029|007|As for those who believe and lead righteous lives, We will erase their sins and reward them according to the best of their actions.
029|008|We’ve instructed man to honor his parents. However, if they pressure you to associate something with Me, about which you have no knowledge, don’t obey them. To Me is your return, and I will inform you of everything you did.
029|009|Those who believe and do righteous deeds will be among the righteous.
029|010|Some people profess, “We believe in Allah.” But when they suffer for Allah’s sake, they equate human persecution with Allah’s punishment. Yet, when help comes to them from your Lord, they say, “We were always with you.” Doesn’t Allah know what resides in the hearts of all beings?
029|011|Allah will certainly ascertain those who believe, and He will surely expose the hypocrites.
029|012|Those who disbelieve say to the believers, “Follow our path, and we will carry your sins.” Yet they can’t carry any of their sins. They are liars.
029|013|They will carry their own burdens, and other burdens along with their own. And on Resurrection Day, they will be questioned about their false assertions.
029|014|We sent Noah to his people, and he dwelt among them for a millennium, less fifty years. Then the flood overtook them while they were wrongdoers.
029|015|But We rescued him and those with him in the Ark, and We made it a symbol for all people.
029|016|Consider Abraham, who said to his people, “Worship Allah and revere Him; this is better for you, if only you understood.
029|017|You worship idols besides Allah and invent lies. The idols you worship apart from Allah don’t possess provision for you. Therefore, seek sustenance from Allah, worship Him, and give thanks to Him. To Him, you will be returned.”
029|018|If you deny the truth, nations before you have also denied. The Messenger’s only duty is to deliver the message clearly.
029|019|Didn’t they see how Allah originates creation and then repeats it? This is easy for Allah.
029|020|Say, “Travel through the earth and observe how He initiated creation.” Then, Allah will produce the next existence. Allah has power over everything.
029|021|He punishes whom He wills, and He shows mercy to whom He wills. And to Him, you will be restored.
029|022|You can’t escape from Him on Earth or in the heavens, and you have neither protector nor helper besides Allah.
029|023|Those who reject Allah’s revelations and the meeting with Him have despaired of My mercy and will face severe punishment.
029|024|The only response of his people was that they said, “Kill him or burn him!” Yet, Allah saved him from the Fire. In this are signs for people who believe.
029|025|He said, “Instead of Allah, you’ve taken to worshiping idols; your mutual love will last only in the life of this world; then on the Day of Resurrection, you will deny each other and curse each other; and your refuge shall be the fire, and you will have no helpers.”
029|026|Lot believed in him. He said, “I am migrating to my Lord. He is the Almighty, the Wise.”
029|027|And We gave him Isaac and Jacob, and in his lineage, We established prophethood and the Scripture. We gave him his reward in this life, and in the Hereafter, he will be among the righteous.
029|028|Lot told his people, “You commit such indecency as no other community has ever committed.
029|029|You approach men with desire, cut off roads, and commit indecency in your gatherings.” But his people only responded, “Bring upon us Allah’s punishment, if you are truthful.”
029|030|He prayed, “My Lord, give me victory against these corrupt people.”
029|031|When Our messengers brought the good news to Abraham, they also announced, “We are about to destroy the inhabitants of this town, for they are immersed in sin.”
029|032|He protested, “But Lot resides there!” They replied, “We are well aware of who resides there. We will rescue him and his family, except for his wife, destined to be among those left behind.”
029|033|When Our messengers arrived at Lot’s home, they were mistreated, and he was distressed on their account. They reassured him, saying, “Fear not, nor grieve, We will save you and your family, except for your wife, destined to be among the doomed.”
029|034|“We are going to bring down on the people of this town a punishment from the sky due to their transgressions.”
029|035|We left of it an evident sign, for people endowed with intelligence.
029|036|And to Midian, their brother Shuaib. He implored, “O my people, worship Allah, have hope in the Last Day and don’t create disorder in the land.”
029|037|But they rejected him, and the tremor seized them, leaving them lifeless in their homes.
029|038|And Aad, and Thamud—it became clear to you from their dwellings. Satan made their deeds appear pleasing to them, leading them astray from the path, even though they could see.
029|039|And Korah, Pharaoh, and Haman—Moses came to them with clear signs, but they behaved arrogantly in the land. Yet, they weren’t out of reach.
029|040|We seized each of them for their wrongdoings. Some We swept away in a sandstorm; a blast struck others; some We caused the earth to swallow; and others We drowned. It was not Allah who wronged them, but they wronged themselves.
029|041|The example of those who take allies other than Allah is like that of the spider who builds a house. Yet, the weakest of houses is the house of the spider—if they only knew.
029|042|Allah knows whatever they invoke besides Him. He is the Mighty, the Wise.
029|043|We present such parables to people, but only those with knowledge can comprehend them.
029|044|Allah created the heavens and the earth with truth. In this, there is a sign for believers.
029|045|Communicate what has been revealed to you from the Scripture, and establish prayer. Prayer repels immorality and wrongdoing, and the remembrance of Allah is greater. Allah is fully aware of what you do.
029|046|Debate with the People of the Scripture only in the kindest manner, except with those who do wrong among them. And say, “We believe in what was revealed to us, and in what was revealed to you. Our God and your God is One, and to Him we submit.”
029|047|Thus, We revealed the Scripture to you. Those to whom We gave the Scripture, as well as some of these, believe in it. None renounce our verses except the unbelievers.
029|048|You didn’t recite any scripture before this or write one with your right hand. If you had, the fabricators of falsehood would have doubted.
029|049|Rather, these are clear signs in the hearts of those endowed with knowledge. None reject Our verses except the unjust.
029|050|They question, “Why are no miracles sent down to him from his Lord?” Respond, “The miracles are solely with Allah, and I am simply a plain warner.”
029|051|Isn’t it sufficient for them that We revealed to you the Scripture, which is conveyed to them? In this are mercy and reminders for people who believe.
029|052|Say, “Allah is sufficient as a witness between me and you. He knows everything in the heavens and on earth. Those who believe in falsehood and reject Allah—they are the ones who will be the losers.”
029|053|They urge you to hasten the punishment. If not for a set term, the punishment would’ve already come upon them. Yet, it will come upon them suddenly while they are unaware.
029|054|They urge you to hasten the punishment. Hell will undoubtedly envelop the unbelievers.
029|055|On the Day when the punishment will envelop them from above them and from below their feet, He will say, “Taste what you used to do!”
029|056|O My servants who have believed, My earth is vast, so worship only Me.
029|057|Every soul will taste death. Then, you will be returned to Us.
029|058|Those who believe and lead righteous lives, We will settle them in Paradise, in dwellings beneath which rivers flow, where they will stay forever. What an excellent reward for the workers.
029|059|Those who exercise patience and put their trust in their Lord.
029|060|How many living creatures don’t carry their provisions? Allah provides for them and for you. He is the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing.
029|061|If you were to ask them, “Who created the heavens and the earth? Who governs the sun and the moon?” They would surely answer, “Allah.” How then are they deluded?
029|062|Allah extends the provision for whom He wills of His beings and restricts it. Allah is fully aware of all things.
029|063|If you were to ask them, “Who sends down rain from the sky, thereby reviving the lifeless earth?” They would surely answer, “Allah.” Then say, “Praise be to Allah!” Yet, most of them don’t apply their intellect.
029|064|This worldly life is nothing more than diversion and entertainment. And indeed, the home of the Hereafter—that’s the life, if only they knew.
029|065|When they board a vessel, they call upon Allah, devoting their prayer sincerely to Him. However, once He delivers them safely to land, they attribute partners to Him.
029|066|In doing so, they show ingratitude for what We’ve given them. Let them indulge in it. Soon, they will realize.
029|067|Can’t they see that We’ve established a secure sanctuary, while people are being snatched away all around them? Do they believe in falsehood and deny Allah’s favors?
029|068|Who could be more unjust than the one who invents lies against Allah or denies the truth when it comes to him? Isn’t there a place in Hell reserved for the unbelievers?
029|069|Those who strive for Us, We will guide them along Our way. Allah is with the doers of good.
030|001|Alif. Lam. Meem.
030|002|The Romans have been defeated.
030|003|In the nearest region of the land, and yet, after their defeat, they will be victorious.
030|004|Within a few years—to Allah belongs the command, before and after. And on that day, the believers will rejoice.
030|005|In the victory of Allah. He grants victory to whom He wills. He is the Almighty, the Merciful.
030|006|The promise of Allah—Allah never breaks His promise, but most people don’t know.
030|007|They know the superficial aspects of this worldly life, but they are oblivious to the Hereafter.
030|008|Don’t they reflect within themselves? Allah didn’t create the heavens, the earth, and what’s between them, except with the truth and for a determined term. Yet, many among humankind deny the meeting with their Lord.
030|009|Didn’t they travel through the earth and see how was the end of those before them? They were stronger than them. They tilled the ground and developed it more than they have developed it. Their messengers came to them with clear proofs. Surely, Allah was not to wrong them; they wronged themselves.
030|010|The outcome for those who did evil was the worst, because they denied Allah’s signs and they used to ridicule them.
030|011|Allah begins creation; then He will repeat it; then you will be returned to Him.
030|012|On the Day the Hour sets in, the guilty will be struck with despair.
030|013|None of their associates will intercede for them, and they will reject their partners.
030|014|On the Day when the Hour appears—on that Day, they will be separated.
030|015|As for those who believed and did righteous deeds, they will be made happy in a Garden.
030|016|However, those who disbelieved, denied Our revelations and the meeting of the Hereafter—those will be ushered into punishment.
030|017|So exalted is Allah when you reach the evening and when you reach the morning.
030|018|To Him belongs all praise in the heavens and the earth, and in the late afternoon, and when the day begins to decline.
030|019|He brings the living from the dead, and He brings the dead from the living, and He revives the earth after its death. Likewise, you will be resurrected.
030|020|Among His signs is that He created you from dust—and behold—you are humans spreading.
030|021|And among His signs is that He created for you, of yourselves, mates, so that you may find tranquility in them, and He placed between you love and mercy. In that are signs for those who reflect.
030|022|And among His signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth, and the variations of your languages and your colors. In that are signs for the knowledgeable.
030|023|And among His signs is your sleep, during both night and day, and your pursuit of His bounty. In that are signs for people who would hear.
030|024|And among His signs is that He shows you the lightning, causing fear and aspiration, and He sends rain down from the sky, reviving the earth after its death. In that are lessons for those who understand.
030|025|And among His signs is that heaven and earth stand by His command. Then, when He calls you out from the earth, you will emerge at once.
030|026|Every being in the heavens and on earth belongs to Him; all are obedient to Him.
030|027|He is the One who begins creation, then repeats it, and it is easier for Him. To Him pertains the highest example in the heavens and on earth. He is the Mighty, the Wise.
030|028|He offers you a comparison from your own selves: would you make your servants equal partners in your wealth, you fear them as you fear each other? Thus, We make the revelations clear for those who reflect.
030|029|The wrongdoers follow their desires without knowledge. Who can guide those whom Allah has led astray? They have no helpers.
030|030|Embrace the faith of monotheism—the inclination Allah has instilled in humans. There is no altering of Allah’s creation. This is the upright religion, yet most people are unaware.
030|031|Turn to Him, be conscious of Him, and establish prayer. And don’t be of those who associate others with Him.
030|032|Those who divided their religion and became denominations, each faction rejoicing in what they possess.
030|033|When adversity touches people, they call upon their Lord, turning sincerely to Him. Yet when He gives them a taste of His mercy, some of them ascribe partners to their Lord.
030|034|In this way, they are ungrateful for what We’ve given them. Enjoy the fleeting pleasure; you will find out.
030|035|Did We grant them any authority that justifies their association of partners with Him?
030|036|When We let people taste mercy, they rejoice in it. But when adversity strikes them as a result of their actions, they fall into despair.
030|037|Don’t they realize that Allah expands the provision for whom He wills, and He restricts it? Therein lie signs for a people who believe.
030|038|So give the near kin his due right, and also the needy and the displaced. This is best for those who seek Allah’s favor; these are the ones who will prosper.
030|039|The interest you charge to increase people’s wealth doesn’t grow with Allah. But the charity you give, seeking Allah’s presence, these are the ones that will multiply.
030|040|Allah is the One who created you, provides for you, causes you to die, and then revives you. Can any of your ’partners’ do any of that? Glorified is He, and exalted above what they associate with Him.
030|041|Corruption has appeared on land and sea, because of what people’s hands have done, causing them to experience some of the effects of their deeds, so they may return.
030|042|Say, “Roam the earth, and see the outcome of those who came before. Most of them were polytheists.”
030|043|Dedicate yourself to the authentic, ever-true religion, before a Day comes from Allah that can’t be averted. On that Day, they will be divided.
030|044|The disbelief of the unbelievers only serves to burden them; meanwhile, those who act righteously are preparing for their own selves.
030|045|He rewards those who believe and do good works from His bounty. He doesn’t love the unbelievers.
030|046|Among His signs are the winds, heralds of good news, enabling you to experience His mercy. Ships sail by His command, for you to seek from His bounty, so you may give thanks.
030|047|We sent before you messengers to their own peoples and they came to them with clear proofs. Then, We exacted retribution from those who sinned. It is incumbent upon Us to help the believers.
030|048|Allah is the One who releases the winds, stirring up clouds. He spreads them across the sky as He wills, and He breaks them up. You see raindrops issuing from within them. Then, when He makes it fall upon whom He will of His beings, behold, they rejoice.
030|049|Though before it was sent down upon them—just before that—they were in despair.
030|050|Look at the traces of Allah’s mercy, how He revives the earth after its death. He is the One who will revive the dead, and He has power over all things.
030|051|But if We send a wind, and they see it turning things yellow, they would, after that, persist in their disbelief.
030|052|You can’t make the dead hear, nor can you make the deaf hear the call when they’ve turned their backs and retreated.
030|053|And you can’t guide the blind out of their misguidance. You can make hear only those who believe in Our messages and have submitted.
030|054|Allah is the One who created you weak, then made you strong after weakness, then decreed after strength, weakness and old age. He creates as He wills. He is the All-Knowing, the All-Powerful.
030|055|On the Day when the Hour arrives, the criminals will swear they remained only an hour; thus are they deluded.
030|056|Those given knowledge and faith will say, “According to Allah’s decree, you remained until Resurrection Day. This is the Day of Resurrection, but you were unaware.”
030|057|On that Day, the excuses of those who did wrong won’t benefit them, nor will they be permitted to make amends.
030|058|In this Quran, We present various parables for people. Yet, regardless of what verse you offer them, the unbelievers will say, “You are just making things up.”
030|059|Thus Allah seals the hearts of those who don’t know.
030|060|So be patient; the promise of Allah is truth. And let not those who lack certainty discourage you.
031|001|Alif. Lam. Meem.
031|002|These are the verses of the Book of Wisdom.
031|003|Guidance and mercy for the doers of good.
031|004|Those who perform prayer, give purifying charity, and are certain of the Hereafter.
031|005|These are guided by their Lord. These are the successful.
031|006|Some people purchase vain talk to mislead others from Allah’s path without knowledge, and they treat it with ridicule. For them, a humiliating punishment awaits.
031|007|When Our verses are recited to him, he turns away arrogantly, as if he didn’t hear them, as if his ears are blocked. So, inform him of a severe punishment.
031|008|Those who believe and do righteous deeds—for them are Gardens of Delight.
031|009|Where they will dwell eternally. The promise of Allah is truth. He is the Mighty, the Wise.
031|010|He created the heavens with no visible pillars, and He placed firm mountains on the earth, lest it shakes with you. He spread throughout it a variety of living creatures. We send down rain from the sky, causing all types of fine plants to grow.
031|011|This is the creation of Allah. Now, show Me what those other than Him have created. The wrongdoers are in clear error.
031|012|We granted Luqman wisdom: “Give thanks to Allah. Whoever is grateful, it is for his own good. And whoever is ungrateful—Allah is Self-Sufficient and Praiseworthy.”
031|013|Luqman said to his son while counseling him, “O my son, don’t associate anything with Allah, for polytheism is a tremendous injustice.”
031|014|We instructed the human being to honor his parents. His mother carried him with hardship and gave birth to him in pain, and his weaning takes two years. Be grateful to Me and your parents; to Me is the final destination.
031|015|But if they endeavor to make you associate others with Me, of which you don’t know, don’t obey them. However, treat them kindly in this world, and follow the path of those who turn to Me. Then, to Me is your return, and I will inform you of everything you did.
031|016|“O my son, even the weight of a mustard seed, whether hidden in a rock, the heavens, or on earth, Allah will bring it forth. Allah is Subtle, All-Aware.
031|017|O my son, establish prayer, advocate for righteousness, forbid what’s wrong, and be patient with whatever happens to you. These are matters of determination.
031|018|And don’t turn your cheek in scorn towards people, and don’t strut around exultantly on earth. Allah doesn’t like any arrogant boaster.
031|019|And walk modestly and lower your voice; the most unpleasant of sounds is the braying of donkeys.”
031|020|Don’t you see that Allah subjected everything in the heavens and on earth to you, and He showered upon you His visible and hidden blessings? Yet some argue about Allah without knowledge, guidance, and an enlightening scripture.
031|021|When they’re advised, “Follow what Allah revealed,” they respond, “No, we follow what we found our ancestors doing.” Even if Satan is leading them towards the torment of the Inferno?
031|022|Whoever submits completely to Allah and leads a righteous life has grasped the most secure handhold. The ultimate outcome of all matters is to Allah.
031|023|As for those who disbelieve, don’t let their disbelief sadden you. They will return to Us, and We will inform them of their deeds. Allah is fully aware of the contents of the hearts.
031|024|We give them little enjoyment, but ultimately, We will drive them to a harsh punishment.
031|025|If you ask them, “Who created the heavens and the earth?” They would answer, “Allah.” Say, “Praise be to Allah.” But most of them don’t understand.
031|026|To Allah belongs everything in the heavens and the earth. Allah is the Rich, the Praiseworthy.
031|027|Even if all the trees on earth were made into pens, and the ocean, supplemented by seven additional oceans, were turned into ink, Allah’s words wouldn’t be depleted. Allah is Exalted in Might and Wisdom.
031|028|Your creation and resurrection are akin to that of a single soul. Allah is All-Hearing, All-Seeing.
031|029|Don’t you see how Allah merges night into day and day into night? How He subjected the sun and the moon, each running for a specified period, and that Allah is fully aware of your deeds?
031|030|This is because Allah is the Absolute Truth, and anything that they invoke beside Him is false. Allah is the Exalted, the Great.
031|031|Don’t you see how ships sail across the sea by Allah’s grace, to show you some of His signs? In this, there are signs for every patient, grateful person.
031|032|When engulfed by towering waves, they call upon Allah, sincerely devoted to Him. Yet, once he brings them safely to land, some of them waver. Only the ungrateful, treacherous denies Our signs.
031|033|O people! Be mindful of your Lord, and fear a Day when no parent can avail their child, nor can a child avail their parent. Indeed, the promise of Allah is true. Therefore, let not the transient life deceive you, and let not the arch-deceiver deceive you about Allah.
031|034|The knowledge of the Hour is with Allah. He sends down the rain, and He knows what’s in the wombs. No soul knows what it will earn tomorrow, and no soul knows in which land it will die. Allah is All-Knowing, Fully-Aware.
032|001|Alif. Lam. Meem.
032|002|This Book, beyond doubt, is a revelation from the Lord of the worlds.
032|003|Do they say, “He fabricated it”? No, it is the truth from your Lord, to warn a people who received no prior warning, so they may be guided.
032|004|It is Allah who created the heavens and the earth, and whatever is between, in six periods, then He established Himself upon the throne. You have no protector or intercessor apart from Him. Will you not remember?
032|005|He directs the affairs from the heavens to the earth; then it ascends to Him, in a Day the measure of which is a thousand years according to your calculations.
032|006|He is the Knower of the unseen and the seen, the Almighty, the Most Merciful.
032|007|He who perfected everything that He created and began the creation of man from clay.
032|008|Then, He made his reproduction from an extract of a base fluid.
032|009|Then He shaped him and breathed into him from His Spirit, giving you hearing, sight, and intelligence. Yet, you are seldom grateful.
032|010|They question, “After we have disintegrated into the earth, are we to be created anew?” In fact, they deny the meeting with their Lord.
032|011|Say, “The angel of death, assigned to you, will reclaim you, then you will be returned to your Lord.”
032|012|If only you could see when the guilty bow their heads before their Lord: “Our Lord, we’ve seen and heard, so send us back, and we will act righteously. We are now convinced.”
032|013|Had We willed, We could’ve given every soul its guidance, but My decree has been fulfilled: “I will fill Hell with jinn and humans altogether.”
032|014|So taste, because you forgot the meeting of this Day of yours. We’ve forgotten you. Taste the punishment of eternity for what you used to do.
032|015|When reminded of them, those who believe in Our revelations fall prostrate and glorify their Lord with praise, without any pride.
032|016|Their sides shun their beds, calling upon their Lord in fear and hope. And from what We’ve provided for them, they spend.
032|017|No soul knows what delights to the eyes are kept hidden for it—a reward for their deeds.
032|018|Is the believer like the sinner? They are not equal.
032|019|As for those who believe and do righteous deeds, for them are the Gardens of Refuge, as accommodation for what they used to do.
032|020|But for those who defiantly disobey, their dwelling will be the Fire. Every time they wish to get out of it, they will be returned to it, and it will be said to them, “Taste the punishment of the Fire which you used to deny.”
032|021|We will make them taste the lesser suffering, before the greater suffering, so they may return.
032|022|Who is more unjust than the one who, when reminded of his Lord’s verses, turns away from them? We will take revenge on the criminals.
032|023|We gave Moses the Scripture, so don’t be in doubt about His meeting. And We made it a guide for the Children of Israel.
032|024|We selected leaders from among them, who, under Our guidance, directed others, as long as they demonstrated steadfastness and had unwavering belief in Our revelations.
032|025|On the Day of Resurrection, your Lord will adjudicate among them concerning the matters they disputed.
032|026|Isn’t it a lesson for them, how many generations We destroyed before them, in whose dwellings they walk? Indeed in that are signs; do they not hear?
032|027|Don’t they see that We drive water to barren land, and with it, We produce crops that they and their livestock eat? Can’t they see?
032|028|And they say, “When will this judgment come, if you are truthful?”
032|029|Say, “On the day of judgment, the faith of those who disbelieved won’t benefit them, nor will they be reprieved.”
032|030|So turn away from them and wait, they are also waiting.
033|001|O Prophet, be aware of Allah, and don’t obey the unbelievers and the hypocrites. Allah is All-Knowing, Most Wise.
033|002|Follow what has been revealed to you from your Lord, for Allah is fully aware of what you do.
033|003|And trust in Allah; and sufficient is Allah as Disposer of affairs.
033|004|Allah didn’t place two hearts within any man’s body. He didn’t make your wives, whom you equate with your mothers, your actual mothers. Nor did He make your adopted children, your actual children. These are but words from your mouths. Allah speaks the truth, and He guides along the path.
033|005|Name them after their fathers; this is more equitable in Allah’s sight. If you don’t know their fathers, they are your brothers in faith and dependents. There is no blame upon you for the mistakes you make, but only for what your hearts purposely intend. Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
033|006|The Prophet is closer to the believers than themselves, and his wives are mothers to them. As decreed by Allah, blood relatives have greater rights over each other than the believers and the emigrants. However, you are still obligated to treat your friends kindly. This is inscribed in the Scripture.
033|007|We received a solemn oath from the Prophets, including you, Noah, Abraham, Moses, and Jesus, son of Mary. We received from them a firm covenant.
033|008|He will then question the truthful about their truthfulness, and He prepared a severe punishment for the unbelievers.
033|009|O you who believe, remember Allah’s favor upon you, when armies advanced against you, and We sent upon them a wind and forces you didn’t see. Allah is watchful of all your actions.
033|010|When they advanced upon you from above and below, your vision blurred, your hearts reached the throats, and you began to doubt Allah.
033|011|There, the believers were tested and severely shaken.
033|012|The hypocrites and those with diseased hearts said, “Allah and His Messenger promised us nothing but delusions.”
033|013|Among them, some said, “O people of Yathrib, you can’t withstand, so retreat.” Meanwhile, others sought permission from the Prophet, saying, “Our homes are exposed,” when they were not. They only intended to flee.
033|014|If they had been invaded from all sides, and they were incited to sedition, they would’ve indulged in it.
033|015|They had previously made a covenant with Allah that they wouldn’t turn their backs. The covenant with Allah must be answered for.
033|016|Say, “Fleeing won’t benefit you, if you flee from death or killing. Even then, you would be indulged only a little.”
033|017|Say, “Who can protect you from Allah if He intends harm or mercy for you?” They will find no ally or helper besides Allah.
033|018|Allah knows those among you who discourage others and those who say to their brethren, “Come to us,” yet they seldom engage in battle.
033|019|They are reluctant to support you. When danger looms, you see them staring at you, their eyes rolling, as if they are on the verge of death. Yet, when the threat subsides, they lash you with sharp tongues, greedy for the good. These were never believers, so Allah nullified their deeds, a task effortless for Allah.
033|020|They assumed that the Confederates wouldn’t retreat. If the Confederates were to return, they would wish they were amongst the Bedouins in the desert, seeking news about you. If they were with you, they would hardly engage in battle.
033|021|In Allah’s Messenger, you have an excellent example for those who hope for Allah and the Last Day and remember Allah often.
033|022|Upon seeing the Confederate forces, the believers said, “This is what Allah and His Messenger promised us; truly, Allah and His Messenger spoke the truth.” It only increased them in faith and submission.
033|023|Among the believers are men who have been true to their covenant with Allah. Some of them have met their obligations, and some are still waiting, unwavering in their commitment.
033|024|That Allah may reward the truthful for their truthfulness, and He may punish the hypocrites if He wills or accept their repentance. Allah is Forgiving, Most Merciful.
033|025|And Allah repulsed those who disbelieved, in their rage; they gained no advantage. Allah was sufficient for the believers in battle. Allah is Powerful, Most Dignified.
033|026|He brought down those who supported them among the People of the Scripture from their fortresses, and He cast terror into their hearts. You killed some and took others as captives.
033|027|He let you inherit their lands, their houses, their wealth, and lands you had not trodden. Allah has power over all things.
033|028|O Prophet, tell your wives, “If you desire the worldly life and its glitter, then come; I will provide for you and release you honorably.
033|029|But if you wish for Allah and His Messenger and the Home of the Hereafter, then indeed, Allah has prepared for those who do good among you an immense reward.
033|030|O wives of the Prophet, those who commit a clear immorality among you, doubled will be her suffering, and that is easy for Allah.
033|031|And whoever of you devoutly obeys Allah and His messenger and does good, We will give her her reward twice over, and We have prepared for her a noble provision.
033|032|O wives of the Prophet, you are unlike any other women if you uphold righteousness. Therefore, don’t be seductive in speech, lest he in whose heart is a disease should desire, but speak with appropriate speech.
033|033|Settle in your homes, and don’t flaunt your beauty, as in the former days of ignorance. Establish prayer, give the purifying charity, and obey Allah and His Messenger. Allah intends to remove all impurities from you, O People of the Household, and to purify you thoroughly.
033|034|Be mindful of what’s recited in your homes of Allah’s verses and wisdom. Allah is always Kind and Well-Informed.
033|035|The submissive men and women, the believing men and women, the devout men and women, the honest men and women, the patient men and women, the humble men and women, the charitable men and women, the fasting men and women, the men and women who guard their chastity, and the men and women who frequently remember Allah—for them, Allah has prepared forgiveness and a great reward.
033|036|Believers, both men and women, have no right to question the decisions made by Allah and His Messenger. Those who disobey Allah and His Messenger have deviated into clear error.
033|037|You said to the one whom Allah had favored and you had favored, “Keep your wife and fear Allah,” while concealing within yourself what Allah was going to reveal. You feared people, but it is more appropriate that you fear Allah. Then, when Zaid had dissolved his marriage with her, We wedded her to you, so that there would be no fault in believers marrying the divorced wives of their adopted sons. Allah’s command is always fulfilled.
033|038|The Prophet is not liable for what Allah has ordained for him. This is Allah’s established way with those who came before. The command of Allah is a destiny determined.
033|039|Those who convey Allah’s messages, fear Him, and fear none but Allah. Allah is sufficient as a Reckoner.
033|040|Muhammad is not the father of any man among you, but he is Allah’s Messenger and the Prophets’ seal. Allah has full knowledge of all things.
033|041|O you who believe, remember Allah with much remembrance.
033|042|And praise Him morning and evening.
033|043|It is He who reaches out to you, and His angels, to bring you from darkness into light. He is ever Merciful to the believers.
033|044|Their greeting on the Day they meet Him will be “Peace,” and He prepared for them a generous reward.
033|045|O Prophet, We sent you as a witness, a bearer of good news, and a warner.
033|046|Inviting to Allah by His permission, and as a luminous lamp.
033|047|Give the believers the good news of Allah’s abundant grace.
033|048|Don’t obey the unbelievers and the hypocrites; dismiss their annoyances, and rely on Allah. Allah is sufficient as a Protector.
033|049|O you who believe, when you marry believing women and then divorce them before you have touched them, you have no obligation to observe a waiting period for them. Provide for them, and release them graciously.
033|050|O Prophet, We’ve made lawful for you your wives to whom you’ve given their due compensation, and what your right hand possesses from what Allah has granted you. Also, the daughters of your paternal uncle, and the daughters of your paternal aunts, and the daughters of your maternal uncle, and the daughters of your maternal aunts who migrated with you. Additionally, a believing woman who offered herself to the Prophet, if the Prophet desires to marry her—exclusively for you, not for the other believers. We certainly know what We ordained for them regarding their wives and those their right hands possess, so that there may be no discomfort for you. Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
033|051|You may postpone any of those you wish, and you may receive anyone you wish. There is no blame on you if you invite one whose turn you had previously set aside. This is more appropriate, so that they may be comforted, not saddened, and may all be pleased with what you give them. Allah knows what’s in your hearts. Allah is All-Knowing, Most Forbearing.
033|052|No women are lawful for you after this, nor can you exchange them for other wives, even if their beauty captivates you, except what your right hand possesses. Allah is watchful over everything.
033|053|O you who believe, don’t enter the Prophet’s homes for a meal, unless you are invited, and don’t wait for its preparation. But if you are invited, then enter. And when you have eaten, then disperse, not lingering for conversation. This behavior may cause the Prophet discomfort, and he would be shy to dismiss you, but Allah is not shy of the truth. When you ask his wives for something, do so from behind a partition. This is purer for your hearts and theirs. It is not suitable for you to offend Allah’s Messenger, nor should you ever marry his wives after him. Indeed, this would be a grave offense in Allah’s sight.
033|054|Whether you reveal something or conceal it, Allah is always aware of everything.
033|055|There is no blame on them regarding their fathers, sons, brothers, brothers’ sons, sisters’ sons, their women, or those under their protection. So let them fear Allah. Allah is a witness to everything.
033|056|Allah and His angels send blessings upon the Prophet. O you who believe, invoke blessings and peace upon him.
033|057|Those who insult Allah and His Messenger, Allah has cursed them in this world and the Hereafter, and He prepared for them a humiliating punishment.
033|058|Those who harm believing men and women undeservedly, bear on themselves the guilt of slander and a manifest sin.
033|059|O Prophet, instruct your wives, daughters, and the believers’ women to lengthen their garments, so they may be recognized and not be harassed. Allah is ever Forgiving, Most Merciful.
033|060|If the hypocrites, those in whose hearts is sickness, and those who spread malicious rumors in the city don’t cease, We will incite you against them; then they won’t be your neighbors therein except for a little while.
033|061|Cursed they are. Wherever they are found, they are to be apprehended and executed promptly.
033|062|This has been Allah’s established way with those who passed before. You will find no alteration in Allah’s way.
033|063|People ask you concerning the Hour. Say, “Knowledge of it is only with Allah. And what will make you know? Perhaps the Hour is near.”
033|064|Allah has cursed the unbelievers and prepared for them a blazing Fire.
033|065|There, they will remain forever, devoid of any protector or helper.
033|066|On the Day when their faces are flipped in the Fire, they will cry out, “Oh, how we wish we had obeyed Allah and the Messenger.”
033|067|And they will say, “Our Lord, we obeyed our leaders and great ones, but they led us astray from the path.
033|068|Our Lord, give them double the punishment and curse them severely.”
033|069|O you who believe, don’t be like those who hurt Moses, yet Allah absolved him of what they said. And he was distinguished in Allah’s sight.
033|070|O you who have faith, revere Allah, and always speak with straightforward words.
033|071|He will correct your actions and forgive your sins. Whoever obeys Allah and His Messenger has achieved a magnificent triumph.
033|072|We presented the trust to the heavens, the earth, and the mountains, but they refused to bear it, fearing its consequences. However, man undertook it, being inherently unjust and ignorant.
033|073|Allah will punish the hypocritical men and women, and the polytheistic men and women. And Allah pardons the believing men and women. Allah is always Forgiving, Most Merciful.
034|001|Praise be to Allah, to whom belongs everything in the heavens and the earth, and praise be to Him in the Hereafter. He is the Wise, the Expert.
034|002|He knows what penetrates the earth and what emerges from it, what descends from the sky, and what ascends to it. He is the Merciful, the Forgiving.
034|003|Those disbelieving say, “The Hour won’t come upon us.” Say, “Yes, by my Lord, it will surely come upon you. He is the Knower of the Unseen.” Not an atom’s weight within the heavens and the earth escapes from His knowledge, nor anything smaller or larger, but it is recorded in a clear book.
034|004|He will reward those who believe and do good deeds. For them is forgiveness and generous provision.
034|005|But for those who strive against Our verses, trying to undermine them, will be a torment of painful wrath.
034|006|Those endowed with knowledge recognize that what’s revealed to you from your Lord is the truth, guiding to the path of the Almighty, the Praiseworthy.
034|007|Those who disbelieved said, “Shall we point out to you a man who will inform you, that when you’ve disintegrated completely, you will be created anew?”
034|008|“Did he invent a lie about Allah, or is he afflicted with madness?” Those who don’t believe in the Hereafter suffer and are far astray.
034|009|Didn’t they consider what’s before them and what’s behind them of the heavens and the earth? If We will, We could let the earth swallow them, or drop pieces of the sky on them. In this, there is a sign for every returning servant.
034|010|We bestowed upon David a grace from Us: “O mountains, sing praises with him, and you birds as well.” And We softened iron for him.
034|011|“Craft coats of armor, and balance the links well. And work righteousness. I am observant of what you do.”
034|012|For Solomon, the wind, its outward journey was one month, and its return journey was one month. We made a spring of tar flow for him. Among Jinns are those who worked for him by his Lord’s permission. Whoever deviated from Our command among them, We made him taste of the punishment of the Blaze.
034|013|They made for him whatever he pleased—sanctuaries, statues, bowls like reservoirs, and firmly fixed cooking pots. “Work gratefully, O house of David.” But few of My servants are grateful.
034|014|When We decreed his death, nothing showed them his death except an earthworm consuming his staff. When he fell, the jinn perceived that if they had known the unseen, they wouldn’t have remained in the shameful torment.
034|015|There was a sign for Sheba in their homeland: two gardens, one on the right and one on the left. “Eat from your Lord’s provisions, and give thanks to Him. A good land and a forgiving Lord.”
034|016|Yet they turned away, so We sent upon them the Flood of Dam, and We replaced their two gardens with gardens yielding bitter fruit, tamarisks, and a few thorny shrubs.
034|017|We penalized them for their ingratitude. Would we penalize any but the ungrateful?
034|018|We placed between them and the towns that We had blessed, prominent towns, and We determined the distances between them: “Travel safely between them, night and day.”
034|019|Yet they said, “Our Lord, extend the distances of our journeys,” and they wronged themselves. As a result, We made them legends and scattered them in every direction. There are signs in this for every patient, grateful individual.
034|020|Satan’s prediction for them proved accurate; they followed him, except for a group of believers.
034|021|He had no authority over them, except to distinguish those who believed in the Hereafter from those who harbored doubts. Your Lord oversees everything.
034|022|Say, “Call upon those you claim besides Allah. They don’t possess even an atom’s weight in the heavens or the earth, nor do they have any share in them. And He has no helpers among them.”
034|023|Intercession with Him avails nothing except those to whom He grants permission. Once fear is dispelled from their hearts, they will ask, “What did your Lord say?” They will answer, “The truth; and He is the Most High, the Great.”
034|024|Say, “Who provides for you from the heavens and the earth?” Say, “Allah,” and “Either us or you are on guidance or clearly in the wrong.”
034|025|Say, “You won’t be held accountable for our sins, nor will we be held accountable for your actions.”
034|026|Say, “Our Lord will gather us together, then He will judge justly between us. He is the All-Knowing Judge.”
034|027|Say, “Show me those you’ve attached to Him as partners. No, indeed! He is Allah, the Mighty, the Wise.”
034|028|We sent you as a messenger to all of humanity, bearing good news and warnings, but most people are unaware.
034|029|They ask, “When is this promise, if you are truthful?”
034|030|Say, “For you, there is a promised Day. You cannot delay it by an hour, nor can you bring it forward.”
034|031|The unbelievers say, “We will never believe in this Quran, nor in what preceded it.” If only you could see the wrongdoers, held captive before their Lord, casting blame on one another. Those who were oppressed will say to those who were arrogant, “If not for you, we would’ve been believers.”
034|032|The arrogant will answer the oppressed, “Did we deter you from guidance after it had reached you? No, indeed, you were the ones who transgressed.”
034|033|The oppressed will say to the arrogant, “Rather, it was your constant scheming, day and night, urging us to disbelieve in Allah and set up rivals to Him.” And they will hide their regret when they see the punishment. We will place iron collars around the necks of the unbelievers. Won’t they be recompensed for what they did?
034|034|Every time We sent a warner to a city, its affluent inhabitants responded by saying, “We reject the message you’ve been sent with.”
034|035|They say, “We have more wealth and children, and we won’t be punished.”
034|036|Say, “My Lord expands and restricts provision for whom He wills, yet most people don’t know.”
034|037|It is not your wealth or your children that will bring you closer to Us. But those who believe and perform righteous deeds—their rewards will be multiplied, and they will reside in secure homes.
034|038|Those who strive to invalidate Our verses will be subject to punishment.
034|039|Say, “My Lord provides for whom He wills among His servants and restricts for him. Whatever you spend of anything, He will replace it; and He is the best of providers.”
034|040|On the Day He will gather them all together, then say to the angels, “Was it you these people used to worship?”
034|041|They will respond, “Glory to You! Our loyalty is to You, not to them. Rather, they were worshiping the jinn; most of them were believers in them.”
034|042|“Today, you have no power to benefit or harm one another.” And We will say to those who acted unjustly, “Taste the punishment of the Fire, which you used to deny.”
034|043|When Our clear verses are recited to them, they say, “This is nothing but a man who wants to deviate you from what your fathers worshiped.” And they say, “This is nothing but fabricated fiction.” When truth reaches those who disbelieve, they dismiss it as nothing but an obvious sorcery.
034|044|We didn’t give them any scriptures to study, nor did We send any warner to them before you.
034|045|Their predecessors also denied, despite not having attained even a tenth of what We had given them. They denied My messengers, so how was My reproach?
034|046|Say, “I only advise you on one matter: that you stand for Allah in pairs or individually, and then reflect. There is no insanity in your friend; he is only a warner to you before the onset of a severe punishment.”
034|047|Say, “Whatever payment I have asked of you; it is yours. My reward is from Allah alone, who bears witness to all things.”
034|048|Say, “My Lord casts the truth, the Knower of the unseen.”
034|049|Say, “The truth has come, while falsehood can neither originate nor repeat.”
034|050|Say, “If I have strayed, I stray only to my detriment. And if I’m guided, it’s by what my Lord reveals to me. He is All-Hearing and Ever Near.”
034|051|If only you could see, when they will be frightened, with no escape, and they are seized from a place nearby.
034|052|They will say, “We have believed in it.” But how can they attain it from a faraway place?
034|053|They had already disbelieved in it before, conjecturing about the unseen from a distant place.
034|054|A barrier was placed between them and what they desire, just as was done with their past counterparts. They were in disquieting doubt.
035|001|Praise be to Allah, the Originator of the heavens and the earth, who makes the angels as messengers, having wings in twos, threes, and fours. He increases in creation what He wills. Allah is over all things competent.
035|002|None can withhold the mercy Allah opens for people, and none can release it after He has withheld it. He is the All-Wise, the All-Powerful.
035|003|O people, remember Allah’s blessings upon you. Is there any creator other than Allah who provides for you from the sky and the earth? There is no god but Him, so how are you led astray?
035|004|If they reject you, messengers before you were also rejected. To Allah, all matters are returned.
035|005|O people, the promise of Allah is truth, so let not the worldly life delude you, nor let the Deceiver deceive you about Allah.
035|006|Satan is an enemy to you, so treat him as an enemy. He only calls his party to be among the inhabitants of the Blaze.
035|007|Those who disbelieve will have a severe punishment; but those who believe and do righteous deeds—they will have forgiveness and a great reward.
035|008|Consider the one whose evil deeds are made appealing to him, so he sees them as good. Allah misguides whom He wills and guides whom He wills. So, don’t waste yourself over them in regret; Allah is fully aware of what they do.
035|009|It is Allah who sends the winds, so they stir up clouds. We then drive them to a dead land, and with them, We revive the land after its death. Such is the Resurrection.
035|010|Whoever desires honor—all honor belongs to Allah. To Him ascends good speech, and He uplifts righteous conduct. However, those who plot evils will have a severe punishment, and their plotting will fail.
035|011|Allah created you from dust, then from a drop, and then He made you pairs. No female conceives or gives birth except with His knowledge. No one’s lifespan is extended or reduced, but it’s recorded in a decree. This is easy for Allah.
035|012|The two seas aren’t the same. One is fresh, sweet, and satisfying to drink, while the other is salty and bitter. From each, you eat tender meat and derive jewels to wear. You see ships sailing through it, seeking His bounty, so you may give thanks.
035|013|He merges the night into the day, and the day into the night. He subjected the sun and the moon, each running for a specified period. That is Allah, your Lord; to Him belongs all sovereignty. Those whom you invoke besides Him don’t possess a speck.
035|014|If you pray to them, they can’t hear your prayer. And if they heard, they couldn’t respond to you. On Resurrection Day, they will deny your association. None can inform you like an Expert.
035|015|O people, you are those in need of Allah, while Allah is the Free of need, the Praiseworthy.
035|016|If He wills, He can eliminate you, and bring forth a new creation.
035|017|And this is not difficult for Allah.
035|018|No bearer of burdens can bear the burdens of another. Even if a heavily laden soul cries out for relief, none of its burdens can be lifted, not even by a close relative. Your duty is to warn those who privately fear their Lord and establish prayer. Whoever purifies himself does so for his advantage. The final return is to Allah.
035|019|The blind and the sighted aren’t equal.
035|020|Nor are darkness and light.
035|021|Nor are shadows and intense heat.
035|022|And not equal are the living and the dead. Allah makes whom He wills hear, and you can’t make those in the graves hear.
035|023|You are only a warner.
035|024|We sent you with the truth, as a bringer of good news and a warner. Every community has had a warner pass through it.
035|025|If they deny you, their predecessors also denied. Their messengers came to them with clear signs, scriptures, and the illuminating Book.
035|026|Then, I seized those who disbelieved. So, how was my reproach?
035|027|Don’t you see that Allah sends down water from the sky? With it, We produce fruits of various colors. In the mountains are streaks white and red, of various shades, and jet-black.
035|028|Similarly, humans, animals, and livestock are diverse in color. Among His servants, it’s the learned who fear Allah. Allah is Almighty and Forgiving.
035|029|Those who uphold Allah’s Scripture, perform the prayers, and give in charity from what We provide for them, secretly and openly, hope for a commerce that will never fail.
035|030|He will fully compensate them and increase them from His bounty. He is Forgiving and Appreciative.
035|031|The Scripture we revealed to you is the absolute truth, confirming what preceded it. Allah is All-Knowing and Watchful over His beings.
035|032|We then passed the Scripture to Our chosen servants. Among them are those who wrong themselves, those who tread a middle path, and those who, by Allah’s grace, excel in good deeds—this is the greatest bounty.
035|033|They will enter the Gardens of Eden, adorned therein with bracelets of gold and pearls, and their clothing therein will be made of silk.
035|034|They will exclaim, “Praise be to Allah, who removed from us sadness. Our Lord is Forgiving and Appreciative.
035|035|He, who, out of His bounty, has settled us in the Eternal Home, where neither boredom nor fatigue touches us.”
035|036|But those who disbelieved, for them will be the fire of Hell, where they won’t die, and their punishment won’t be lightened. Thus do We recompense every disbeliever.
035|037|There, they will scream, “Our Lord, release us from this, and we will act righteously, unlike our previous deeds.” Didn’t We give you a life long enough for whoever would remember to remember? And the warner did come to you. So taste! For the wrongdoers, there is no helper.
035|038|Allah is the Knower of the unseen realms of the heavens and the earth, and He knows what’s in the hearts.
035|039|It is He who made you stewards of the earth. Whoever disbelieves, his disbelief is against him. The disbelief of unbelievers only increases their Lord’s displeasure of them. The disbelief of the disbelievers adds only to their loss.
035|040|Say, “Consider those you deem as Allah’s equals. Show me what part of the earth they’ve created, or do they have a share in the heavens?” Or did We give them a book from which they derive clear evidence? The evildoers promise each other nothing but delusion.
035|041|Allah upholds the heavens and the earth, preventing them from vanishing. If any entity other than Him were to sustain them, they would surely fall into ruin. Indeed, He is ever Patient and Forgiving.
035|042|They swore their most solemn oaths by Allah, that if a warner came to them, they would be more guided than any other nation. Yet, when a warner came to them, it did not increase them except in aversion.
035|043|They behave arrogantly in the land and scheme evil. But the evil scheme only ensnares its own authors. Can they await anything but the fate of the predecessors? You won’t find any change in Allah’s way nor any deviation from it.
035|044|Didn’t they roam the earth and see how was the end of those before them? They were more powerful than them. Yet there is nothing in the heavens or on earth that can thwart Allah. Indeed, He is All-Knowing, Most Capable.
035|045|If Allah were to seize people for their deeds, He wouldn’t leave a single living thing on its surface. But He delays them until a specified time. And when their time comes—Allah is Observant of His servants.
036|001|Ya, Seen.
036|002|By the Wise Quran.
036|003|You are certainly among the messengers.
036|004|On a straight path.
036|005|The revelation of the Almighty, the Merciful.
036|006|To warn a people whose forefathers weren’t warned, thus they are unaware.
036|007|The word has been justified against most of them, for they don’t believe.
036|008|We placed shackles around their necks, up to their chins, so their heads are forcibly raised.
036|009|We placed a barrier before and a barrier behind them, and we covered them, so they couldn’t see.
036|010|Whether you warn them or not, it’s the same for them—they will not believe.
036|011|You only warn those who adhere to the Message and revere the Most Merciful unseen. Give them good news of forgiveness and a generous reward.
036|012|It’s We who revive the dead, and We record what they forward, and their traces. We accounted for everything in a clear register.
036|013|Present to them a parable: the inhabitants of a city, when the messengers came to it.
036|014|We sent two messengers to them, but they rejected both, so We reinforced them with a third. They said, “We are messengers to you.”
036|015|They replied, “You are nothing but humans like us, and the Merciful revealed nothing. You are only lying.”
036|016|They responded, “Our Lord knows that we’ve been sent to you.
036|017|We only must convey the Clear Message.”
036|018|They said, “We see an ill omen from you. If you don’t stop, we will stone you and punish you severely.”
036|019|They responded, “Your ill omen is with you. Is it because you were reminded? Rather, you are a transgressing people.”
036|020|Then a man came running from the farthest part of the city, saying, “O my people, follow the messengers.
036|021|Follow those who ask no payment from you, and are themselves guided.
036|022|“Why shouldn’t I worship Him who originated me, and to whom you’ll be returned?
036|023|Should I take other gods besides Him? If the Merciful intends harm for me, their intercession won’t avail me at all, nor will they save me.
036|024|In that case, I would be in clear error.
036|025|I have believed in your Lord, so listen to me.”
036|026|It was said, “Enter Paradise,” he exclaimed, “If only my people knew.
036|027|How my Lord has forgiven me and made me among the honored.”
036|028|We didn’t send down upon his people, after him, any hosts from heaven, nor was it necessary.
036|029|It was but one shout, and behold, they were extinguished.
036|030|Alas for the beings! Whenever a messenger comes to them, they ridicule him.
036|031|Didn’t they consider how many generations We destroyed before them, which will never return to them?
036|032|Yet, every single one of them will be brought before Us.
036|033|A sign for them is the dead earth. We give it life, and from it, we produce grain, of which they eat.
036|034|We established gardens of date palms and vineyards in it, We caused springs to burst forth therein.
036|035|So they may eat of its fruit. Their hands didn’t make it. Won’t they give thanks?
036|036|Glory be to Him who created all pairs—from what the earth grows, from themselves, and from what they don’t know.
036|037|Another sign for them is the night. We strip away the day from it, and behold, they are in darkness.
036|038|And the sun runs toward its stopping place. That’s the decree of the Almighty, the Knowing.
036|039|We established phases for the moon, until it returns resembling an old, curved date stalk.
036|040|The sun is not permitted to overtake the moon, nor does the night outpace the day. Each floats in an orbit.
036|041|A sign for them is that We carried their progeny in the filled Ark.
036|042|And We’ve created for them similar to it on which they embark.
036|043|And if We will, We could drown them, with no one to hear their screams, and they won’t be rescued.
036|044|Except out of mercy from Us, and for enjoyment for a while.
036|045|When they are told, “Guard yourselves from what’s before you and what’s behind you, so you may receive mercy.”
036|046|Yet, they persistently ignore every sign that comes to them from their Lord.
036|047|When told, “Give from what Allah has provided you,” the unbelievers say to the believers, “Should we feed those, if Allah willed, He would’ve fed them? You are evidently misguided.”
036|048|And they say, “When will this promise be fulfilled, if you are truthful?”
036|049|They only await a single blast that will seize them while arguing.
036|050|They won’t be able to make any will, nor will they return to their families.
036|051|The Trumpet will be blown, and behold, from their graves, they will rush towards their Lord.
036|052|They will cry out, “Woe to us! Who resurrected us from our resting place? This is what the Merciful had promised, and the messengers spoke the truth.”
036|053|It will be but a single shout, and they will all be brought before Us.
036|054|On that Day, no soul will be wronged in the least, and you will only be reimbursed for your actions.
036|055|That Day, the residents of Paradise will be occupied in joyful things.
036|056|They and their spouses will be reclining on couches in the shade.
036|057|There, they will have fruits and whatever they request.
036|058|“Peace”—a word from a Merciful Lord.
036|059|But separate yourselves today, you criminals!
036|060|Didn’t I covenant with you, O Children of Adam, that you must not worship Satan, for he is your clear enemy?
036|061|And that you should worship Me, for this is a straight path.
036|062|He led many of you astray. Didn’t you use your reason?
036|063|This is the Hellfire you were repeatedly warned about.
036|064|Today, experience it because you used to deny.
036|065|On that Day, We will seal their mouths. Their hands will speak to Us, and their feet will testify to their deeds.
036|066|Had We willed, We could’ve blotted out their eyes; then they would stumble on the path. But how will they see?
036|067|Had We willed, We could’ve immobilized them in their places, leaving them incapable of advancing or retreating.
036|068|Those to whom We grant a long life, We reverse in development. Don’t they understand?
036|069|We didn’t teach him poetry, nor is it appropriate for him. It is but a reminder and a Clear Quran.
036|070|To warn those who are living, and to justify the sentence against the unbelievers.
036|071|Don’t they see that We created for them, from Our handiwork, the livestock that they own?
036|072|And We tamed them for them; some they ride, and some they eat.
036|073|And for them therein are benefits and beverages. Won’t they be grateful?
036|074|Yet, they’ve taken gods other than Allah, hoping they might get help.
036|075|They can’t assist them, but they are troops in readiness for them.
036|076|So let not their statements sadden you. We know what they hide and what they disclose.
036|077|Does man not consider that We created him from a drop, yet behold, he is an open adversary?
036|078|He strikes a comparison for Us, while forgetting his own creation. He asks, “Who can give life to bones while they are disintegrated?”
036|079|Say, “He who initiated their creation will give them life. He is All-Knowing of every creation.”
036|080|Who made for you fire from green trees, and behold, you kindle from it.
036|081|Isn’t He who created the heavens and the earth Able to create the likes of them? And He is the All-Knowing Creator.
036|082|His command, when He intends a thing, is only to say to it, “Be,” and it becomes.
036|083|So glory to He in whose hand is the dominion of everything, and to Him you will be returned.
037|001|By the aligners aligning.
037|002|And the drivers driving.
037|003|And those conveying the message.
037|004|Your God is certainly One.
037|005|Lord of the heavens, the earth, and everything between them, and Lord of the sunrises.
037|006|We adorned the nearest heaven with the beauty of stars.
037|007|And as a protection from every defiant devil.
037|008|They can’t eavesdrop on the Highest Assembly, for they get pelted from every side.
037|009|Repelled, they will face perpetual torment.
037|010|Except for one who snatches a snatch; he is pursued by a piercing flame.
037|011|Ask them, “Are they more difficult to create, or those We created?” We created them from sticky clay.
037|012|Yet you are amazed, and they mock.
037|013|When reminded, they pay no heed.
037|014|When they see a sign, they mock.
037|015|And they say, “This is nothing but apparent magic.
037|016|When we are dead and have become dust and bones, will we be resurrected?
037|017|And our ancient ancestors as well?”
037|018|Say, “Yes, and you’ll be subdued.”
037|019|It will be just a single shout, and behold, they will be staring.
037|020|They will exclaim, “Woe to us! This is Judgement Day.”
037|021|“This is the Day of Separation, which you used to deny.”
037|022|Round up those who did wrong, their partners, and what they used to worship.
037|023|Apart from Allah, and guide them to the way to Hell.
037|024|But stop them, for they are to be questioned.”
037|025|What’s the matter with you that you don’t help each other?
037|026|But, on this day, they will be in submission.
037|027|And they will turn on one another, blaming each other.
037|028|Some will say, “You used to come to us from the right.”
037|029|The others will respond, “No, you yourselves were not believers.
037|030|We had no authority over you; you were a transgressing people.
037|031|So now the word of our Lord has come true against us. We are tasting it.
037|032|We seduced you; we were seducers.”
037|033|On that Day, they will share in the punishment.
037|034|This is how We deal with sinners.
037|035|When they were told, “There is no god but Allah,” they exhibited arrogance.
037|036|And they said, “Shall we leave our gods for a mad poet?”
037|037|He came with the truth and confirmed the messengers.
037|038|You will surely taste the severe punishment.
037|039|And you will only be recompensed for what you used to do.
037|040|Except for the chosen servants of Allah.
037|041|For them, there will be a known provision.
037|042|Fruits, and they will be honored.
037|043|In the Gardens of Delights.
037|044|On thrones, facing one another.
037|045|A cup filled with a drink of pure pleasure will be passed among them.
037|046|Crystal-clear, delicious to those who drink.
037|047|Causing neither headache nor intoxication.
037|048|And with them will be women restraining their glances.
037|049|As though they were protected pearls.
037|050|They will approach one another, inquiring of each other.
037|051|A speaker among them will say, “I had a close companion.
037|052|Who would say, ‘Are you among those who believe?
037|053|That when we die and become dust and bones, we will be held accountable?’”
037|054|He will then ask, “Would you care to look?”
037|055|He looked down and saw him in the midst of the Fire.
037|056|He exclaimed, “By Allah, you nearly led me astray!
037|057|If not for the mercy of my Lord, I would’ve been among those presented.”
037|058|“We are not to die.
037|059|Except for our first death, and we aren’t to be punished.”
037|060|Indeed, this is the great achievement.
037|061|For such, let the workers work.
037|062|Isn’t this a better hospitality than that of the Tree of Bitterness?
037|063|We made it an ordeal for the unjust.
037|064|It’s a tree that sprouts from the core of Hellfire.
037|065|Its buds are like the heads of devils.
037|066|From it, they will eat and fill their stomachs.
037|067|Then, they will have a mixture of scalding brew.
037|068|Then, their return will be to the flaming Inferno.
037|069|They found their ancestors astray.
037|070|And they rushed upon their footsteps.
037|071|Most of the earlier generations before them had also deviated.
037|072|Even though We had sent warners among them.
037|073|See, then, the end of those who were warned.
037|074|Except for the sincere servants of Allah.
037|075|When Noah implored Us—excellent indeed are We in answering!
037|076|We saved him and his family from the great disaster.
037|077|We made his descendants to be those who remained.
037|078|And We preserved his story for those who would come later.
037|079|Peace be upon Noah among all the nations.
037|080|Thus, do We reward those who do good.
037|081|He was one of Our faithful servants.
037|082|Then We drowned the others.
037|083|And among his descendants was Abraham.
037|084|When he approached his Lord with a sound heart.
037|085|He asked his father and his people, “What do you worship?
037|086|Do you prefer false idols over Allah?
037|087|What’s your opinion of the Lord of the Worlds?”
037|088|He then gazed at the stars.
037|089|And he said, “I feel unwell.”
037|090|So they turned away from him, retreating.
037|091|He turned towards their gods and said, “Do you not eat?”
037|092|What is with you that you don’t speak?”
037|093|He then launched a strike against them with his right hand.
037|094|They approached him, rushing toward him.
037|095|He countered, “Do you worship what you carve?
037|096|While it is Allah who created you and all that you make?”
037|097|They responded, “Build a furnace for him, and throw him into the flames.”
037|098|So they hatched a scheme against him, but We made them the inferiors.
037|099|He said, “I will be departing to my Lord; He will guide me.”
037|100|“My Lord, grant me righteous offspring.”
037|101|So We gave him the good news of a forbearing son.
037|102|When he was old enough to work with him, he said, “O my son, I saw in a dream that I’m sacrificing you, so see what you think?” He replied, “O my father, do as you’re commanded; you will find me, if Allah wills, one of the patient.”
037|103|And when they had submitted, he put him down upon his forehead.
037|104|But We called out to him, “O Abraham!
037|105|You have fulfilled the vision.” Thus, do We reward those who do right.
037|106|That was a significant test.
037|107|And We ransomed him with a great sacrifice.
037|108|And We left for him favorable mention among later generations.
037|109|Peace be upon Abraham.
037|110|Thus do We reward those who do good.
037|111|He was one of Our faithful servants.
037|112|And We gave him the good news of Isaac, a prophet, one of the righteous.
037|113|We blessed him and Isaac. However, some are righteous among their descendants, while some clearly wrong themselves.
037|114|We also favored Moses and Aaron.
037|115|We saved them and their people from the great calamity.
037|116|We supported them, and they emerged as victors.
037|117|We gave them the Scripture that sheds light.
037|118|And We guided them on the straight path.
037|119|We left for them a favorable mention among later generations.
037|120|Peace be upon Moses and Aaron.
037|121|Thus do We reward those who do good.
037|122|They were among Our believing servants.
037|123|Elijah was also one of the messengers.
037|124|When he said to his people, “Will you not embrace righteousness?
037|125|Do you call upon Baal and forsake the Best of Creators?
037|126|Allah is your Lord and the Lord of your ancestors.”
037|127|But they rejected him, and they will be apprehended.
037|128|Except for Allah’s chosen servants.
037|129|We left for him a favorable mention among later generations.
037|130|Peace be upon Elijah.
037|131|Thus do We reward those who do good.
037|132|He was one of Our believing servants.
037|133|And Lot was among the messengers.
037|134|We saved him and his entire family.
037|135|Except an elderly woman who was among those left behind.
037|136|Then We destroyed the rest.
037|137|You pass by them in the morning.
037|138|And at night. Will you not then reflect?
037|139|Jonah was also among the messengers.
037|140|When he fled onto the laden ship.
037|141|He gambled and lost.
037|142|A whale swallowed him, and he was to blame.
037|143|Had he not been of those who praised.
037|144|He would’ve remained in its belly until the Day they’re raised.
037|145|Then We threw him into the open, and he was ill and weak.
037|146|And We made a gourd plant grow over him.
037|147|Then, We sent him to a hundred thousand or more.
037|148|They believed, so We gave them enjoyment for some time.
037|149|Now ask them their opinion: “Does your Lord have daughters while they have sons?”
037|150|Or did We create the angels as females while they were witnessing?
037|151|They are speaking from their conjecture when they say.
037|152|“Allah has begotten.” They are liars, definitely.
037|153|Does He prefer daughters over sons?
037|154|What’s the matter with you? How do you judge?
037|155|Won’t you reflect?
037|156|Or do you have clear authority?
037|157|Then produce your scripture, if you are truthful.
037|158|And they made up a relationship between Him and the jinn, yet the jinn know well that they will be summoned.
037|159|Exalted is Allah, above what they describe.
037|160|Except for Allah’s select servants.
037|161|Neither you nor those you worship.
037|162|Can’t seduce away from Him.
037|163|Except those destined for Hell’s embrace.
037|164|“There is none among us but has a known position.
037|165|We are those who stand in rows.
037|166|And we are the praisers.”
037|167|And they used to say.
037|168|“If we had a sermon from the ancients.
037|169|We would’ve been Allah’s faithful servants.”
037|170|Yet, they disbelieved it; they will soon come to know.
037|171|Our word has already been conveyed to Our chosen servants.
037|172|Definitely, they are the ones who will be victorious.
037|173|Surely, Our forces will be the victors.
037|174|So leave them for a while.
037|175|Observe, they will soon witness.
037|176|Are they eager for Our punishment?
037|177|When it descends on their yard, how terrible will be the morning for those who were warned.
037|178|So turn away from them for a while.
037|179|And watch; they soon will see.
037|180|Praised is your Lord, the Lord of Glory, beyond their description.
037|181|And peace be upon the messengers.
037|182|And praise be to Allah, the Lord of the universes.
038|001|Saad. By the Quran abundant in reminders.
038|002|But the unbelievers are steeped in arrogance and defiance.
038|003|How many generations before them did We destroy? They screamed, but it was too late for escape.
038|004|They marvel that a warner has come to them from amongst themselves. The unbelievers have said, “This is a magician, a liar.”
038|005|“Did he turn all the gods into one God? This is something strange.”
038|006|Their leaders set out, saying, “Walk away, and remain loyal to your gods. This is something which is designed.
038|007|We’ve never heard of this in the previous religion. This is nothing but an invented tale.
038|008|Was the message sent exclusively to him among us?” They are in doubt about My message. They haven’t yet tasted My punishment.
038|009|Do they hold the keys to the treasures of your Lord’s mercy—the Majestic, the Giver?
038|010|Do they possess the heavens, the earth, and everything in between? Let them ascend through any means they can.
038|011|An army of allies will be defeated there.
038|012|Before them, the people of Noah, Aad, and Pharaoh of the Stakes, all denied the truth.
038|013|So did Thamud, the people of Lot, and the dwellers of the woods—these were the alliances.
038|014|All of them denied the messengers, so my retribution was justified.
038|015|They await but a single blast, from which there is no recovery.
038|016|They demand, “Our Lord, expedite our portion before the Day of Reckoning.”
038|017|Be patient over what they say, and remember Our servant David, the man of strength; he was devout.
038|018|We subjected the mountains to him, praising at twilight and at dawn.
038|019|And the birds gathered, all are attentive to him.
038|020|We strengthened his kingdom and granted him wisdom and decisive speech.
038|021|Did you hear of the litigants who scaled the sanctuary?
038|022|They startled David when they entered upon him. They said, “Fear not. We are two litigants; one has wronged the other. Judge justly between us, show no bias, and guide us to the right way.”
038|023|“My brother has ninety-nine ewes, while I have only one. Yet he insisted, ‘Entrust it to me,’ and he overpowered me in speech.”
038|024|He responded, “He wronged you by demanding your single ewe be added to his flock. Indeed, many associates wrong one another, except for those who believe and do righteous deeds, and they are few.” Then David realized that We were testing him, so he asked forgiveness from his Lord, fell prostrate, and he turned in repentance.
038|025|We forgave him for that. He holds a position of closeness to Us and a beautiful destination.
038|026|“O David, We made you a successor on earth, so judge between people with justice, and don’t follow desire, lest it diverts you from Allah’s way. Those who stray from Allah’s way will face a severe punishment for forgetting the Day of Account.”
038|027|We didn’t create the heavens, the earth, and everything between them in vain. That’s the misconception of those who disbelieve—woe to the unbelievers from the Fire.
038|028|Shall We treat those who believe and perform righteous deeds the same as those who spread corruption on earth? Or should We treat the devout as the wicked?
038|029|We revealed to you a blessed Book, so they may ponder its verses, and those with discernment may reflect.
038|030|To David, We granted Solomon—a good servant, deeply devoted.
038|031|One evening, fine horses were paraded before him.
038|032|He said, “I have loved material wealth over the remembrance of my Lord—until they disappeared from sight.
038|033|Bring them back to me.” And he began to stroke their legs and necks.
038|034|We tested Solomon, and We placed a figure on his throne. Then he turned back.
038|035|He prayed, “My Lord, forgive me, and grant me a kingdom that none after me can attain; You are the Bestower.”
038|036|So, We subjected the wind to his command, flowing gently at his discretion.
038|037|And also the demons—every builder and diver.
038|038|And others shackled in chains.
038|039|“This is Our gift, so dispense or withhold, without account.”
038|040|He holds a position of proximity to Us, and a beautiful final destination.
038|041|And remember Our servant Job, who appealed to his Lord: “Satan afflicted me with hardship and suffering.”
038|042|“Strike with your foot. Here is cool water for washing and drinking.”
038|043|We restored his family to him, and the same with them, as a mercy from Us, and a lesson for those with understanding.
038|044|“And take in your hand a bundle and strike with it, and don’t break your oath.” We found him patient. What an excellent servant he was, always returning.
038|045|And mention Our servants Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, possessors of strength and insight.
038|046|We granted them a unique favor—the remembrance of the Home.
038|047|They are among Our chosen ones, the outstanding.
038|048|Also remember Ishmael, Elisha, and Ezekiel. Each of them was among the excellent.
038|049|This is a reminder. For the virtuous, there is a beautiful place of return.
038|050|Gardens of Eternity, the gates of which will be open to them.
038|051|Reclining therein, they will call for ample fruit and drink.
038|052|Along with them will be chaste women with modest gaze, of equal age.
038|053|This is what you are promised for the Day of Reckoning.
038|054|This is Our provision, which has no end.
038|055|But for the transgressors, there will be a dreadful place of return.
038|056|Hell—where they will burn, a horrific resting place.
038|057|Let them taste it—boiling water and bitter cold.
038|058|And other torments of a similar kind.
038|059|Here is a group rushing headlong with you. They shall roast in the Fire.
038|060|They will cry out, “No, you are not welcome! It is you who prepared this for us. What a terrible destination!”
038|061|Then they will plead, “Our Lord, whoever led us to this, increase his suffering in the Fire.”
038|062|They will ask, “Why don’t we see those we considered evil?
038|063|Were we mistaken in mocking them, or did our eyes fail to recognize them?”
038|064|This is the quarrel among the dwellers of the Fire.
038|065|Say, “I am only a warner, and there is no god except Allah, the Singular, the Prevailing.
038|066|The Lord of the heavens and the earth, and whatever is between them, the Mighty, the Forgiving.”
038|067|Say, “This is a significant message.
038|068|From which you are turning away.
038|069|I have no knowledge of the Exalted Assembly when they argue.
038|070|It has only been revealed to me that I am a clear warner.”
038|071|When your Lord told the angels, “I am creating a human being from clay.
038|072|Once I have shaped him and breathed into him of My Spirit, prostrate before him.”
038|073|So the angels prostrated all of them together.
038|074|Except for Iblis—he was arrogant and became one of the unbelievers.
038|075|He questioned, “O Iblis, what prevented you from prostrating before the one I created with My hands? Are you too proud, or are you of high rank?”
038|076|He answered, “I am better than him. You created me from fire, while You created him from clay.”
038|077|He commanded, “Then get out of here, for you are an outcast, banished.
038|078|And My curse will be upon you until Judgement Day.”
038|079|He said, “My Lord, allow me to remain until the Day they’re resurrected.”
038|080|He responded, “You are allowed to remain.
038|081|Until the day of the well-known time.”
038|082|He vowed, “By Your might, I will surely seduce them all.
038|083|Except for Your devoted servants among them.”
038|084|He said, “The truth and only the truth I speak.
038|085|I will fill Hell with you and with those of them who follow you—all together.”
038|086|Say, “I ask no reward from you for this, nor am I a pretender.
038|087|It is but a reminder for the world.
038|088|And you will know its news after a while.”
039|001|This Book is a divine revelation from Allah, the Almighty, the Wise.
039|002|We revealed to you the Book of Truth. Therefore, worship Allah, dedicating your religion to Him alone.
039|003|Isn’t exclusive devotion due to Allah? Those who take protectors besides Him say, “We worship them only to bring us closer to Allah.” Allah will judge their differences. Allah doesn’t guide the lying disbeliever.
039|004|If Allah had intended to take a child, He could’ve chosen what He willed from His creation. Glory be to Him! He is Allah, the One, the Overpowering.
039|005|He created the heavens and the earth with purpose. He wraps the night over the day, and He wraps the day over the night. He subjected the sun and the moon, each running for a predetermined period. He is the Almighty, the Forgiving.
039|006|He created you from a single soul. Then, from it, He formed its mate. He sent down eight pairs of livestock for you. He formed you within your mothers’ wombs in successive stages, within a triple darkness. Such is Allah, your Lord; His is the sovereignty. There is no god but Him, so why do you deviate?
039|007|If you are ungrateful, Allah doesn’t need you. Yet, He doesn’t approve of ingratitude from His beings. If you are grateful, He is pleased with you. No bearer of burdens can bear the burdens of another. Ultimately, your return is to your Lord, who will inform you of everything you did. He knows the secrets within the hearts.
039|008|When adversity befalls a person, he earnestly prays to his Lord. Yet, when He bestows a favor upon him from Himself, he forgets his previous appeal, attributing rivals to Allah, leading others astray from His path. Say, “Enjoy your denial for a little while; you are among the inmates of the Fire.”
039|009|Can he who worships devoutly in the watches of the night, prostrating himself and standing in prayer, fearing the Hereafter and hoping for the mercy of his Lord, be like the one who does not? Say, “Could those who know be equal to those who don’t know?” Only those endowed with understanding will take heed.
039|010|Tell My faithful servants always to be mindful of their Lord. For those who do good in this world, there is goodness. Allah’s earth is vast, and the patient will be given their rewards without account.
039|011|Say, “I am commanded to worship Allah, dedicating my faith entirely to Him.
039|012|And I am also commanded to be the first of the Submitters.”
039|013|Say, “I fear the punishment of a formidable Day should I disobey my Lord.”
039|014|Say, “I worship Allah, dedicating my religion purely to Him.”
039|015|“So, worship whatever you want besides Him.” Say, “The losers are those who lose themselves and their families on Resurrection Day.” Most certainly, that’s the most significant loss.
039|016|Upon them are layers of fire, and beneath them are layers. This is how Allah instills fear into His beings. “O My beings, be mindful of Me.”
039|017|As for those who shun false worship and turn in repentance to Allah, for them are glad tidings. So, give good news to My servants.
039|018|Those who listen to the word and follow the best of it are the ones whom Allah has guided, and they are the ones blessed with discernment.
039|019|As for those who deserve the punishment—can you save those who are in the Fire?
039|020|Yet, those who revere their Lord will have lofts, constructed one above another, beneath which rivers flow. This is the promise of Allah, Allah does not fail in His promise.
039|021|Don’t you see how Allah sends down water from the sky, seeping into the earth to form springs? Through them, He produces crops of different colors. Then they wither, and you see them turn yellow, before He reduces them to chaff. In that is a reminder for those who have understanding.
039|022|Consider the one whose heart Allah has opened to Submission, thus receiving enlightenment from his Lord. Woe to those whose hearts have hardened against Allah’s remembrance—those are in obvious error.
039|023|Allah revealed the most excellent message: a book consistent in its teachings, offering repeated reinforcement and serving as a reminder. The skins of those who revere their Lord shiver due to it. Then, their skins and hearts soften to Allah’s remembrance. This is Allah’s guidance, through which He guides whom He wills. But he whom Allah leaves to stray has no guide.
039|024|What about the person who shields his face from the terrible suffering on Resurrection Day? To the evildoers, it will be said, “Taste what you’ve earned.”
039|025|Those before them also denied, so the punishment befell them from where they were unaware.
039|026|Thus, Allah made them taste disgrace in this worldly life, but the punishment of the Hereafter is indeed greater—if only they knew.
039|027|In this Quran, We present various parables for people to ponder.
039|028|A Quran in Arabic, without any discrepancy, so they may become cautious.
039|029|Allah presents an example of a man having quarreling partners and another man entirely belonging to one man. Can they be considered equal? Praise be to Allah! Yet, most of them don’t understand.
039|030|You will surely die, and they, too, will die.
039|031|Then, on Resurrection Day, you will dispute in the presence of your Lord.
039|032|Who could be more unjust than the one who fabricates lies about Allah and denies the truth when it reaches him? Isn’t there a dwelling in Hell for the unbelievers?
039|033|Yet, those who brought the truth and believed in it—these are the righteous ones.
039|034|They will have all that they desire with their Lord. That’s the reward of the good-doers.
039|035|Allah will absolve them of their worst deeds, and He will reward them according to their best deeds.
039|036|Isn’t Allah sufficient for His servant? They threaten you with those other than Him. Whomever Allah allows to stray has no guide.
039|037|And whomever Allah guides—there is none to lead him astray. Isn’t Allah the Almighty, the Avenger?
039|038|If you were to ask them, “Who created the heavens and the earth?” They would surely answer, “Allah.” Then, ask, “Did you consider those you call upon besides Allah? If Allah intends harm for me, would they lift His harm from me? Or if He intends mercy for me, would they withhold His mercy?” Say, “Allah suffices me; in Him trust those who put their trust.”
039|039|Say, “O my people, continue doing whatever you are doing, just as I am. You will soon come to know.
039|040|To whom a punishment comes that disgraces him, on whom an enduring torment descends.”
039|041|We revealed to you the Book for mankind in truth. Whoever follows guidance does so for his good, and whoever goes astray does so to his own loss. You are not responsible for them.
039|042|Allah takes the souls at the time of their death and those that haven’t died in their sleep. He retains those for whom death was decreed, and He sends the others back until their appointed time. In this are signs for those who reflect.
039|043|Or have they taken besides Allah intercessors? Say, “Even though they don’t possess anything, nor do they reason?”
039|044|Say, “All intercession belongs exclusively to Allah. His is the dominion over the heavens and the earth. To Him, you will be returned.”
039|045|And when Allah is mentioned alone, the hearts of those who don’t believe in the Hereafter shrink with aversion, but when those other than Him are mentioned, immediately they rejoice.
039|046|Say: “O Allah, Originator of the heavens and the earth, Knower of the unseen and the witnessed, You will arbitrate among Your servants regarding their disputes.”
039|047|If the wrongdoers possessed everything on earth, and twice as much, they would surely offer it to ransom themselves from the horrific punishment on Resurrection Day. And there will come to them, from Allah, what they had not been counting on.
039|048|They will be confronted with the bad outcomes of their actions, and what they used to ridicule will come back to haunt them.
039|049|When adversity touches a person, he implores Us. But when We bestow a favor upon him, he says, “I acquired this through my knowledge and skill.” Indeed, it is just a trial, but most of them don’t realize.
039|050|Those who preceded them said the same, but their ill-gotten gains availed them not.
039|051|The repercussions of their evil deeds overwhelmed them, and the wrongdoers of this era will also face the consequences of their actions, from which they can’t escape.
039|052|Don’t they realize that Allah expands the provision for whom He wills and restricts it as well? In this are signs for people of faith.
039|053|Say, “O my servants who have transgressed against yourselves: Don’t despair of Allah’s mercy, Allah forgives all sins. It is He who is the Merciful, the Forgiving.”
039|054|Return with wholehearted repentance to your Lord, and submit yourselves completely to Him, before the suffering befalls you, after which you won’t be helped.
039|055|Adhere to the best of what was revealed to you from your Lord, before the punishment engulfs you unexpectedly.
039|056|Lest a soul should lament, “Alas, I have neglected my duty towards Allah and was among the mockers.”
039|057|Or it may say, “Had Allah guided me, I would’ve been among the righteous.”
039|058|Or, it may say when it sees the penalty: “If only I had another chance, I would be among those who do good.”
039|059|But, indeed, My signs came to you, but you denied them, were arrogant, and became a disbeliever.
039|060|On the Day of Resurrection, you will see those who told lies about Allah, their faces blackened. Is not in Hell a residence for the arrogant?
039|061|Allah will deliver the righteous to their destined haven—no harm will touch them, nor will they grieve.
039|062|Allah is the Creator of all things, and He is, over all things, Disposer of affairs.
039|063|To Him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth. Those who deny Allah’s verses are the losers.
039|064|Say, “Do you instruct me to worship someone other than Allah, O ignorant people?”
039|065|It was revealed to you and those before you that if you associate, your deeds will be nullified, and you will be among the losers.
039|066|Rather, worship Allah alone, and be among the thankful.
039|067|They can’t grasp the full extent of Allah’s greatness. The entire earth will be His handful on the Day of Resurrection, and the heaven will be folded in His right hand. Glorified is He, and High above what they associate with Him.
039|068|The Trumpet will be blown, and whoever is in the heavens and in the earth will be struck with terror, except whom Allah wills. Then it will be sounded again, and at once they will be standing, looking on.
039|069|And the earth will shine with the light of its Lord, and the Record will be placed. The prophets and witnesses will be brought forward, judgment will be passed among them in truth, and they won’t be wronged.
039|070|And every soul will be fully compensated for what it has done. He is well aware of what they do.
039|071|The unbelievers will be driven to Hell in groups, until, when they reach it, its gates are opened, and its keepers will say to them, “Did not messengers come to you from yourselves, reciting to you the verses of your Lord and warning you of the meeting of this Day of yours?” They will say, “Yes, but the decree of punishment has been justified against the unbelievers.”
039|072|It will be said, “Enter the gates of Hell, to dwell therein forever.” Wretched is the dwelling of the arrogant!
039|073|Those who revered their Lord will be led in groups towards Paradise. When they near it, its gates will be opened, and its keepers will greet them: “Peace be upon you, you’ve been good; so enter here, to dwell forever.”
039|074|They will say, “Praise be to Allah, who fulfilled His promise to us and made us inherit this land, allowing us to settle in Paradise wherever we wish. How splendid is the reward of the workers.”
039|075|You will see the angels surrounding the Throne, glorifying their Lord with praises. And it was judged between them in truth, and it will be said, “Praise be to Allah, the Lord of the universes.”
040|001|Ha. Meem.
040|002|The revelation of the Scripture is from Allah, the Almighty, the All-Knowing.
040|003|He is the forgiver of sins, acceptor of repentance, severe in retribution, and of infinite forbearance. There is no god except Him; to Him is the ultimate return.
040|004|None dispute Allah’s revelations except those who disbelieve. Let not their activities in the lands deceive you.
040|005|The people of Noah denied the truth before them, as did the factions after them. Every community plotted against their own messenger, to seize him. They argued with falsehood to invalidate the truth. Yet, I seized them, and how severe was My retribution!
040|006|The decree of your Lord against those who disbelieve is just: “They are the occupants of the Fire.”
040|007|Those who carry the Throne, and those around it, glorify their Lord with praises, believe in Him, and plead for forgiveness for those who believe: “Our Lord, You encompass all things in mercy and knowledge; forgive those who have repented and followed Your path, and shield them from the torment of the Inferno.
040|008|Admit them, Our Lord, into the Gardens of Eternity, which You’ve promised them, along with the righteous among their parents, spouses, and offspring. You are the All-Powerful, the All-Wise.
040|009|And shield them from evil deeds. Whomever You shield from evil deeds on that Day has received Your mercy, and that’s the ultimate triumph.”
040|010|The disbelievers will be told, “Allah’s abhorrence of you is greater than your self-loathing, for when you were invited to faith, you refused.”
040|011|They will plead, “Our Lord, You’ve caused us to die twice, and You’ve given us life twice. Now we admit our sins; is there an escape?”
040|012|This is because when Allah alone was called upon, you disbelieved, but when partners were associated with Him, you believed. Judgment belongs to Allah, the Most High, the Supreme.
040|013|It is He who shows you His marvels and sends down sustenance from the sky for you. Only those who turn to Him will truly understand.
040|014|Invoke Allah, dedicating your devotion to Him, even though the unbelievers may detest it.
040|015|He is of the highest rank, the Master of all sovereignty. He sends down the Spirit by His command to whichever of His servants He wills, to warn of the Day of Encounter.
040|016|On that Day, they will emerge, with nothing about them will be hidden from Allah. To whom does sovereignty belong today? To Allah, the One, the Irresistible.
040|017|On that Day, every soul will be recompensed for what it has earned. There will be no injustice on that Day. Allah is swift in taking account.
040|018|Warn them of the approaching Day, when hearts are at throats, choked with fear. The wrongdoers will have no comforting friend, nor any intercessor who might be obeyed.
040|019|He knows the treachery of the eyes and what the hearts conceal.
040|020|Allah judges with the truth, while those they call upon other than Him can’t judge at all. Allah is the All-Hearing, the All-Seeing.
040|021|Didn’t they journey through the earth and see what was the end of those before them? They were stronger than them, and had more impact on the earth. Yet, Allah seized them for their sins, and they had no protector against Allah.
040|022|Their messengers came to them with clear signs, yet they disbelieved. So, Allah seized them. He is powerful and severe in retribution.
040|023|We sent Moses with Our signs and a manifest authority.
040|024|To Pharaoh, Haman, and Korah, but they said, “A magician, a liar”.
040|025|When he brought them the truth from Us, they said, “Kill the sons of those who believe with him, and spare their women.” Yet, the plots of the unbelievers are destined to fail.
040|026|Pharaoh declared, “Leave me to kill Moses, and let him appeal to his Lord. I fear he may change your religion or spread disorder in the land.”
040|027|Moses responded, “I seek refuge in my Lord and your Lord from every arrogant one who doesn’t believe in the Day of Reckoning.”
040|028|A believing man from Pharaoh’s family, who had concealed his faith, said, “Would you kill a man just because he says, ‘My Lord is Allah,’ and he brought you clear proofs from your Lord? If he is lying, his lie will be upon him, but if he’s truthful, then some of what he promises you will befall you. Surely, Allah doesn’t guide the extravagant liar.
040|029|O my people, you have the kingdom today and you are dominant in the land. But who will save us from Allah’s wrath, if it were to befall us?” Pharaoh said, “I only show you what I see and guide you to the path of right conduct.”
040|030|The believer continued, “O my people, I fear for you a fate like that of the day of the confederates.
040|031|Like the fate of the people of Noah, Aad, Thamud, and those after them. Allah doesn’t intend any injustice for the beings.
040|032|O my people, I fear for you the Day of Calling Out.
040|033|The Day when you will turn around and retreat, having no defender against Allah. Whomever Allah sends astray will have no guide.”
040|034|Joseph had previously come to you with clear proofs, but you remained doubtful about what he brought you. So when he died, you said, “Allah won’t send a messenger after him.” Thus, Allah misguides the transgressors and doubtful.
040|035|Those who dispute Allah’s verses, without any authority given to them, are greatly despised by Allah and those who believe. Thus, Allah seals the heart of every arrogant tyrant.
040|036|Pharaoh commanded, “O Haman, build me a tower, that I may reach the pathways.
040|037|The pathways into the heavens, so I may look at the God of Moses, but I think he’s a liar.” Thus, Pharaoh’s evil deeds were made appealing to him, and he was barred from the path. Pharaoh’s scheming led only to ruin.
040|038|The believer pleaded, “O my people, follow me, and I will guide you to the path of righteousness.”
040|039|“O my people, this worldly life is fleeting enjoyment, while the Hereafter is the home of permanence.”
040|040|He who does an evil deed will only be repaid with its equivalent. However, whoever acts righteously, whether male or female, while being a believer, will enter Paradise, where they will be provided for without measure.
040|041|“O my people! How is it that I invite you to salvation while you invite me to the Fire?
040|042|You urge me to disbelieve in Allah and to associate with Him what I don’t know, while I invite you to the Almighty, the Forgiving.
040|043|No doubt, what you invite me to has no calling in this world, nor in the Hereafter. Our return is to Allah, and the transgressors will be the inhabitants of the Fire.
040|044|You will soon remember what I say to you. I commit my affairs to Allah. Truly, Allah is Seeing of the beings.”
040|045|So Allah protected him from the evil schemes they plotted, while a terrible punishment engulfed Pharaoh’s people.
040|046|The Fire! They will be exposed to it morning and evening, and on the Day when the Hour sets in: “Admit Pharaoh’s family into the severest of punishment.”
040|047|As they quarrel in the Fire, the weak will say to those who were arrogant, “We were your followers; can you then relieve us of a portion of the Fire?”
040|048|The arrogant will reply, “We are all in it —Allah has already judged among the beings.”
040|049|Those in the Fire will beg the keepers of Hell, “Implore your Lord to lessen our suffering for just one day.”
040|050|They will respond, “Didn’t your messengers come to you with clear signs?” They will reply, “Yes.” They will say, “Then pray, but the prayers of the unbelievers are only in vain.”
040|051|We will surely aid Our messengers and those who believe, in the worldly life and on the Day when the witnesses arise.
040|052|The Day when their excuses won’t benefit the wrongdoers. For them is a curse, and they will have the worst dwelling.
040|053|We gave Moses the guidance, and We made the Children of Israel inherit the Scripture.
040|054|A guide and a reminder for people of understanding.
040|055|So be patient, the promise of Allah is truth. So ask forgiveness for your sin, and glorify your Lord with praise, morning and evening.
040|056|Those who dispute Allah’s revelations without any authority given to them, nothing resides in their breasts but vainglory which they will never achieve. So, seek refuge in Allah. He is the All-Hearing, the All-Seeing.
040|057|The creation of the heavens and the earth is greater than the creation of humankind, but most people don’t know.
040|058|Not equal are the blind and the seeing, nor are those who believe and perform good deeds and the wrongdoers. How little you reflect.
040|059|The Hour is coming, there is no doubt about it, yet most people don’t believe.
040|060|Your Lord says, “Pray to Me, and I will respond to you. Those who are too arrogant to worship Me will enter Hell humiliated.”
040|061|It is Allah who made the night for your rest and the day for visibility. Allah is full of Bounty to mankind, but most of them don’t give thanks.
040|062|That is Allah, your Lord, the Creator of all things; there is no deity but Him. So how are you deluded?
040|063|So it is that those who deny Allah’s signs deviate.
040|064|It is Allah who made the earth a dwelling for you, and the sky a structure. He formed you and perfected your forms, and provided you with good things. Such is Allah, your Lord. Blessed is Allah, the Lord of the realms.
040|065|He is the Living; there is no deity except Him. Call upon Him, dedicating your faith exclusively to Him. Praise be to Allah, the Lord of the worlds.
040|066|Say, “I have been forbidden to worship those you invoke apart from Allah, as clear proofs have come to me from my Lord, and I am commanded to submit to the Lord of the universes.”
040|067|It is He who created you from dust, then from a drop, then from a clot, and then He brings you out as infants. Then, you reach your full strength. Then, you become elderly—although some of you die earlier—that you may reach a appointed term and gain understanding.
040|068|It is He who gives life and causes death. When He decrees an affair, He says to it, “Be,” and it becomes.
040|069|Didn’t you see how those who dispute concerning Allah’s verses—how are they averted?
040|070|Those who deny the Scripture and what We sent Our messengers with, will indeed know.
040|071|With shackles around their necks, and dragged by chains.
040|072|In boiling water, then in the Fire they will be burnt.
040|073|Then it will be said to them, “Where are those whom you used to associate?
040|074|Besides Allah?” They will reply, “They have deserted us. Actually, we were not calling upon anything before.” In this way, Allah lets the unbelievers go astray.
040|075|This is because you exulted in the earth baselessly, and because you were frolicking.
040|076|Enter the gates of hell to stay therein forever—what a terrible abode for the arrogant!
040|077|Therefore, be patient; the promise of Allah is true. Whether We show you some of what We’ve promised them, or We cause you to pass away, to Us, they will be returned.
040|078|We sent messengers before you; some of their stories We’ve told you, and some We haven’t. No messenger can bring a sign except by Allah’s permission. When Allah’s decree comes, the matter will be settled in truth, and those who perpetuated falsehood will then lose.
040|079|It is Allah who made for you the livestock, that you may ride some of them and from some you eat.
040|080|And you have in them other benefits too, and you fulfill your diverse needs through them. You are carried upon them, as well as on ships.
040|081|And He shows you His signs: Which then of Allah’s signs will you deny?
040|082|Didn’t they travel through the earth and see the fate of those who preceded them? They were more numerous and powerful, having left more impressive marks on the earth, yet their achievements availed them not.
040|083|So when their messengers came to them with clear evidence, they exulted in the knowledge they already possessed, but what they used to mock encompassed them.
040|084|And when they saw Our wrath, they said, “We believe in Allah alone and reject what we were associating with Him.”
040|085|But their faith didn’t benefit them when they saw Our punishment. Such is Allah’s Law of dealing with His beings. And there, the unbelievers lost utterly.
041|001|Ha. Meem.
041|002|A revelation from the Compassionate, the Merciful.
041|003|A Book whose verses have been detailed. An Arabic Quran for people who understand.
041|004|Bringing good news and warning, but most have turned away, so they don’t hear.
041|005|They say, “Our hearts are covered from what you call us towards, in our ears is deafness, and there is a veil between you and us. So act, we too are acting.”
041|006|Say, “I am only a human like you, divinely inspired that your God is One God. Be upright towards Him and ask for His forgiveness.” Woe to those who associate others with Him!
041|007|Those who don’t give purity and deny the Hereafter.
041|008|For those who believe and do good deeds, there is an endless reward.
041|009|Say, “Do you deny the One who created the earth in two periods? And do you attribute equals to Him? He is the Lord of the realms.”
041|010|He placed anchors upon it, blessed it, and proportioned its sustenance in four equal intervals for all who ask.
041|011|Then, He turned to the sky, which was smoke, and He said to it and the earth, “Come, willingly or unwillingly.” They responded, “We come willingly.”
041|012|Thus, He completed them as seven heavens in two periods, and He assigned to each heaven its duty. We adorned the nearest heaven with lamps and protection. Such is the decree of the Almighty, the All-Knowing.
041|013|If they turn away, say, “I have warned you of a thunderbolt, similar to Aad’s and Thamud’s.”
041|014|When the messengers came to them, from in front and behind, saying, “Worship none but Allah,” they responded, “If our Lord had willed, He would’ve sent down angels. Therefore, we disbelieve in your message.”
041|015|As for Aad, they were arrogant on earth, denied the truth, and said, “Who is mightier than us?” Didn’t they see that Allah, who created them, is mightier than them? And they continued to deny Our revelations.
041|016|So We unleashed upon them a roaring wind, for a few unfortunate days, to make them taste the disgraceful punishment in this worldly life. However, the punishment of the Hereafter is more shameful, and they won’t be helped.
041|017|As for Thamud, We offered them guidance, but they preferred blindness over guidance. Thus, the thunderbolt of a humiliating punishment seized them for their deeds.
041|018|And We saved those who believed and were righteous.
041|019|On the Day when Allah’s enemies are gathered and marshaled towards the Fire.
041|020|When they reach it, their hearing, their eyes, and their skin will testify against them regarding what they used to do.
041|021|They will ask their skins, “Why did you testify against us?” They will reply, “Allah, who gave everything the ability to speak, made us speak. He who first created you, and to Him, you will return.
041|022|You could not shield yourselves from your hearing, sight, and skins testifying against you. And you thought that Allah didn’t know much of what you do.
041|023|Your misconception about your Lord caused your ruin, and now you are among the losers.
041|024|If they endure patiently, the Fire is their destination. If they try to justify themselves, they won’t be pardoned.
041|025|We’ve appointed partners for them, who make their past and future actions attractive to them, leading them towards a fate akin to that of previous generations of jinn and humans, all of whom ultimately met their loss.
041|026|The unbelievers say, “Don’t listen to this Quran, and drown it in noise, so you may prevail.”
041|027|We will make those who disbelieve taste the severe punishment and reward them with the worst of what they used to do.
041|028|This is the retribution for Allah’s enemies: the Fire, their eternal dwelling, a recompense because they used to deny Our signs.
041|029|The disbelievers will plead, “Our Lord, show us those who misled us—both jinn and humans—so we may put them beneath our feet, reducing them to the lowest.”
041|030|Those who say, “Our Lord is Allah,” and then go straight, the angels will descend upon them: “Fear not, nor grieve, but rejoice in the Paradise that you’ve been promised.
041|031|We are your allies in this life and in the Hereafter, where you will have everything your hearts could desire and everything you request.
041|032|A hospitality from a Merciful Forgiver.”
041|033|Who speaks better than one who calls to Allah, acts righteously, and says, “I am among those who submit”?
041|034|Good and evil aren’t equal. Repel by what’s better, and your former enemy may become a dear friend.
041|035|Yet, none will attain it except those who are patient. And none will attain it except the very fortunate.
041|036|When a provocation from Satan assails you, seek refuge in Allah. He is the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing.
041|037|Among His signs are the night and the day, and the sun and the moon. Don’t bow down to the sun or the moon, but bow down to Allah, who created them both, if it’s Him that you serve.
041|038|If they display arrogance, those who stand in your Lord’s presence praise Him night and day, and they never tire.
041|039|Among His signs: you see the earth barren, but when We send down water upon it, it quivers and grows. Indeed, He who gave it life, is the Giver of Life to the dead; He has power over everything.
041|040|Those who distort Our verses aren’t hidden from Us. Are those who are hurled into the Fire better, or those who arrive safe and sound on Resurrection Day? Do what you wish; He is Seeing of everything you do.
041|041|Those who reject the Reminder when it comes to them—it’s an invincible Book.
041|042|Falsehood can’t approach it, neither from before it, nor from behind it. It is a revelation from a Wise, Praiseworthy One.
041|043|Nothing is said to you that wasn’t said to the messengers before you: your Lord is the Owner of forgiveness, and the Owner of painful retribution.
041|044|Had We made the Quran in a foreign language, they would have said, “Why are its verses not explained clearly?” A foreign and Arabic?” Say, “It is guidance and healing for those who believe. Yet, those who disbelieve are deaf and blind to it. They are being called from a place far away.”
041|045|We gave Moses the Scripture, but disputes arose regarding it. If it wasn’t for a predetermined decision from your Lord, they would’ve been judged immediately. Yet they are in perplexing doubt about it.
041|046|Whoever acts righteously is for his good, and whoever commits evil is to his detriment. Your Lord does not wrong the servants.
041|047|To Him belongs the knowledge of the Hour. No fruit emerges from its sheath, nor does any female conceive or give birth, except with His knowledge. On the Day when He questions them, “Where are My partners?” They will reply, “We confess to You, not one of us can testify to that.”
041|048|What they used to invoke before will disappear from them, and they will realize that there is no refuge for them.
041|049|Man never tires of praying for good, but if adversity touches him, he becomes despondent and despairing.
041|050|And if we make him taste mercy from Us after harm has touched him, he will surely say, “This is for me, and I don’t think the Hour will come. And even if I’m returned to my Lord, surely, with Him, I will have the ultimate good.” But We will inform those who disbelieve of what they did, and We will make them taste a harsh punishment.
041|051|When We bestow blessings upon a person, he turns away and withdraws. But when adversity touches him, he indulges in extensive prayers.
041|052|Say, “Have you considered: if it is from Allah and you rejected it, who is more astray than one who is in extreme dissension?”
041|053|We will show them Our signs on the horizons and within themselves, until it becomes clear to them that it’s the truth. Does it not suffice that your Lord is a Witness over everything?
041|054|Yes, they are in doubt about meeting their Lord. Yes, He fully encompasses all things.
042|001|Ha. Meem.
042|002|Ayn. Seen. Qaaf.
042|003|Thus does Allah, the Mighty, the Wise, inspire you and those before you.
042|004|Everything in the heavens and on earth belongs to Him. He is the Most High, the Supreme.
042|005|The heavens almost rupture from above them, while the angels praise the glory of their Lord and seek forgiveness for those on earth. Allah is the Forgiving, the Merciful.
042|006|As for those who take protectors other than Him, Allah is watchful over them, and you aren’t a trustee over them.
042|007|Thus, We revealed to you an Arabic Quran, to warn the Mother of Cities and those around it, and to warn of the Day of Gathering, about which there is no doubt. A group will be in paradise, and a group in the Blaze.
042|008|Had Allah willed, He could’ve made them one community, but He admits into His mercy whom He wills. The wrongdoers have no protector or helper.
042|009|Or have they taken protectors other than Him? Allah alone is the Protector. He gives life to the dead, and He is over all things capable.
042|010|In any matter of dispute, the final decision rests with Allah. “This is Allah, my Lord. Upon Him I have relied, and to Him I turn.”
042|011|The Creator of the heavens and the earth, has made for you mates from your own kind, and pairs of livestock, by which He multiplies you. There is nothing like Him. He is the All-Hearer, the All-Seer.
042|012|To Him belong the controls of the heavens and the earth. He extends provision for whomever He wills, and restricts. He is fully aware of everything.
042|013|He ordained for you the same religion He enjoined upon Noah, and what We revealed to you, and what We enjoined upon Abraham, Moses, and Jesus: “Uphold the religion, and don’t be divided within it.” What you call the polytheists to is difficult for them. Allah chooses for Himself whom He wills and guides to Himself whoever turns back.
042|014|They didn’t become divided until after knowledge had come to them, out of mutual envy. If not for a prior decree from your Lord, judgment would’ve been issued between them. Those who were made to inherit the Scripture after them are in troubling doubt concerning it.
042|015|So, invite to this, and be upright as you’re commanded, and don’t follow their desires. And say, “I believe in whatever Scripture Allah revealed. And I am commanded to judge justly among you. Allah is our Lord and your Lord. We have our deeds, and you have yours. There is no contention between us and you. Allah will bring us together, and to Him is the final return.”
042|016|As for those who argue about Allah after his acceptance, their argument is null before their Lord, and upon them is wrath, and for them is severe punishment.
042|017|It is Allah who revealed the Scripture with truth and balance. What would make you realize? Perhaps the Hour is near.
042|018|Those who don’t believe in it seek to hasten it, but those who believe are fearful of it, and they know that it’s the truth. Those who dispute about the Hour are indeed in a far misguidance.
042|019|Allah is kind to His servants. He provides sustenance for whomever He wills. He is the Strong, the Mighty.
042|020|Whoever desires the harvest of the Hereafter, we will increase for him his yield. And whoever desires the harvest of this world, We will give him some of it, but in the Hereafter he will have no share.
042|021|Or do they have associates who have legislated for them a religion not authorized by Allah? If not for a conclusive word, judgment would’ve been passed between them. The wrongdoers will face a grievous punishment.
042|022|You will see the wrongdoers fearful of what they’ve earned, and it will befall them. Yet those who believe and do righteous deeds will be in the meadows of the gardens, receiving whatever they desire from their Lord. This is the greatest bounty.
042|023|Allah gives this good news to His servants who believe and perform righteous deeds. Say, “I ask no reward from you for it, except affection to kin.” Whoever earns a good deed, We will increase its goodness for him. Allah is Forgiving and Appreciative.
042|024|Or do they say, “He invented lies about Allah”? If Allah willed, He could seal your heart. But Allah dispels falsehoods and establishes the truth with His words. He is fully aware of what resides within hearts.
042|025|It is He who accepts repentance from His beings, forgives sins and knows what you do.
042|026|He answers those who believe and perform righteous deeds, and increases them from His bounty. But the unbelievers will suffer a harsh punishment.
042|027|If Allah were to expand the provision for His servants, they would commit excess on earth. But He sends down what He wills in measured amounts. He is All-Seeing and All-Aware of His beings.
042|028|It is He who sends down rain after they have lost hope and spreads His mercy. He is the Protector, the Praiseworthy.
042|029|Among His signs are the creation of the heavens and the earth, and the living creatures He has spread within them. And He is capable of gathering them at will.
042|030|Whatever misfortune befalls you is due to your deeds. Yet, He pardons much.
042|031|You can’t escape on earth, and you have no protector or helper besides Allah.
042|032|Among His signs are ships sailing like mountains in the sea.
042|033|If He willed, He could still the wind, leaving them motionless on its surface. In this, there are signs for every patient, grateful person.
042|034|Or He could destroy them because of what they’ve earned, yet He pardons much.
042|035|Those who dispute Allah’s revelations won’t find any refuge.
042|036|What you’ve been given is merely the enjoyment of the temporal worldly life, but what Allah possesses is better and more enduring for those who believe and rely on their Lord.
042|037|Those who avoid grave sins and indecencies; and when they are angered, they forgive.
042|038|Those who respond to their Lord, perform their prayers, conduct their affairs by mutual consultation, and give from what We provide for them.
042|039|Those who, when tyranny afflicts them, defend themselves.
042|040|The retribution for an evil deed is an equivalent evil. Yet, whoever pardons and reconciles, his reward is with Allah. He doesn’t love the wrongdoers.
042|041|Those who retaliate after being wronged bear no guilt.
042|042|The guilt lies with those who oppress others and instigate aggression on earth without justice. For them, there is a severe punishment.
042|043|Those who patiently endure and forgive demonstrate fortitude.
042|044|Whomever Allah misguides will have no protector besides Him. When they face the punishment, you will witness the wrongdoers pleading, “Is there any way to go back?”
042|045|You will see them exposed to it, humbled by disgrace, looking with a furtive glance. The believers will say, “The losers are those who lost themselves and their families on Resurrection Day.” Surely, the wrongdoers are in lasting punishment.
042|046|They will have no protectors to aid them other than Allah. And for whomever Allah leaves astray, there is no way.
042|047|Respond to your Lord before a Day from Allah arrives that can’t be repelled. On that Day, you will have no shelter, and no possibility of denial.
042|048|If they turn away, We didn’t send you as their keeper. Your responsibility is only to deliver the message. When We bestow Our grace on a person, he rejoices in it. And when adversity touches him due to his deeds, man becomes ungrateful.
042|049|To Allah belongs the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth. He creates whatever He wills. He grants to whom He wills females, and males to whom He wills.
042|050|Or He combines them in pairs, male and female, and He renders whom He wills infertile. He is All-Knowing, Most Capable.
042|051|It is not for any human that Allah should speak to him, except through revelation, or from behind a veil, or by sending a messenger to reveal, by His permission, what He wills. He is Exalted, Wise.
042|052|And thus, We’ve revealed to you an inspiration of Our command. You didn’t know what the Scripture was, nor the faith. But We made it a light, guiding with it whomever We will of Our servants. You are guiding them to a straight path.
042|053|The path of Allah, to Whom belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on earth. Unquestionably, to Allah do all matters evolve.
043|001|Ha. Meem.
043|002|By the clear and enlightening Scripture.
043|003|We’ve made it an Arabic Quran, so you may understand.
043|004|In fact, it is in the Source of the Book with Us, exalted and full of wisdom.
043|005|Should We withdraw the Message from you, since you are a people who transgress?
043|006|How many a Prophet did We send among the ancients?
043|007|Yet, no Prophet came to them but they mocked him.
043|008|We destroyed those far more powerful than them, and the example of the ancients has gone past.
043|009|If you were to ask them, “Who created the heavens and the earth?” They would surely state, “The Almighty, the All-Knowing created them.”
043|010|He who made the earth a cradle for you, and traced routes upon it for you, so you may find your way.
043|011|He who sends down rain from the sky in measured quantities, and with it, We revive a lifeless land. Similarly, you will be resurrected.
043|012|He who created all paired things, and granted for you ships and animals that you may ride.
043|013|So that you may be mounted on their backs, remember your Lord’s favor when seated on them, and say, “Exalted be He who has put this under our control; we couldn’t have done it by ourselves.
043|014|And indeed, to our Lord, we will return.”
043|015|They made some of His servants a part of Him. The human being is openly ungrateful.
043|016|Did He choose daughters for Himself from what He created, and favored you with sons?
043|017|When one of them is informed of what he attributes to the Most Merciful, his face darkens, and he is repressed with grief.
043|018|“An entity nurtured amidst ornaments?” And he suppresses inner conflicts.
043|019|They attribute the angels, who are servants of the Gracious, as females. Did they witness their creation? Their testimony will be recorded, and they will be questioned.
043|020|They assert, “If the Merciful had willed, we wouldn’t have worshiped them.” They don’t know this; they are only speculating.
043|021|Or did We give them a scripture before this one to which they are adhering?
043|022|But they say, “We found our ancestors upon a course, and we are guided by their footsteps.”
043|023|Likewise, whenever We sent a warner before you to any city, its affluent inhabitants said, “We found our forefathers following a path, and we are following in their footsteps.”
043|024|He would say, “Even if I bring you better guidance than what you found your forefathers following?” They would reply, “We reject what you’ve been sent with.”
043|025|So We wreaked vengeance on them. Consider the end of the deniers.
043|026|Abraham told his father and his people, “I am free from what you worship.
043|027|Only He who created me will guide me.”
043|028|He left this a lasting word among his descendants, so they might return.
043|029|I allowed these and their ancestors some enjoyment, until the truth arrived with a transparent messenger.
043|030|However, when the truth came to them, they said, “This is sorcery, and we disbelieve it.”
043|031|They ask, “Why wasn’t this Quran revealed to a notable man from one of the two cities?”
043|032|Is it they who dispense your Lord’s mercy? It is We who distribute their sustenance in this life, elevating some in ranks above others, so that they may take one another in service. Your Lord’s mercy is far better than whatever they amass.
043|033|Were it not that all mankind might become one community, We would have granted the Merciful-deniers houses with ceilings of silver and stairways upon which they could ascend.
043|034|And for their homes, doors, and beds on which they recline.
043|035|And all kinds of ornaments. However, all these are merely transient pleasures of this worldly life. The Hereafter, with your Lord, is for the righteous.
043|036|For those who shun the remembrance of the Most Merciful, We assign for them a devil to be their constant companion.
043|037|They lead them astray from the path, while they think they are guided.
043|038|Until, when he comes before Us, he will say, “I wish you and I were as distant as the two horizons—what a terrible companionship!”
043|039|It won’t benefit you on that Day if you did wrong; you will be sharing in the punishment.
043|040|Can you make the deaf hear; or guide the blind, or those who are in evident error.
043|041|Even if We were to take you away, We will inflict punishment upon them.
043|042|Or We may show you what We promised them, for We have absolute control over them.
043|043|So, adhere to what was revealed to you; you are on a straight path.
043|044|It is a reminder for you and your people, and you’ll be questioned.
043|045|Ask the messengers We sent before you: “Did We ever appoint gods to be worshiped other than the Most Merciful?”
043|046|With Our signs, we sent Moses to Pharaoh and his assembly, proclaiming, “I am the messenger of the Lord of the worlds.”
043|047|But when he presented Our verses to them, they laughed at them.
043|048|Every miracle We showed them was more significant than the one preceding it. And We afflicted them with plagues, so they might return.
043|049|They pleaded, “O magician, pray to your Lord for us, according to the covenant He made with you, and we will be guided.”
043|050|But when We relieved their affliction, they immediately broke their promise.
043|051|Pharaoh proclaimed among his people, “O my people, do I not rule Egypt, with these rivers flowing beneath me? Can’t you see?
043|052|Am I not superior to this pitiful wretch who can barely express himself?
043|053|Why were no gold bracelets dropped on him, or angels accompanying him in procession?”
043|054|He fooled his people, and they obeyed him. They were a people prone to wrongdoing.
043|055|When they provoked Our wrath, We retaliated by drowning them all.
043|056|And We made them a precedent and an example for future generations.
043|057|When the instance of Jesus, son of Mary, was cited, your people immediately jeered.
043|058|They argued, “Are our gods better, or is he?” They posed this question only to argue. They are a quarrelsome lot.
043|059|He was but a servant whom We blessed, and We set him an example for the Children of Israel.
043|060|Had We willed, We could’ve made from you angels to be successors on earth.
043|061|He is knowledge for the Hour. Have no doubt about it, and follow me. This is a straight path.
043|062|And don’t let Satan divert you; he is your clear enemy.
043|063|When Jesus came with the evident miracles, he said, “I’ve come to you with wisdom, and to clarify some of your disagreements. So fear Allah, and obey me.
043|064|Allah is my Lord and your Lord, so worship Him. This is a straight path.”
043|065|But the sects differed among themselves. Woe to those who commit wrong, for they will face severe punishment on a dreadful day.
043|066|Are they merely waiting for the Hour to come upon them suddenly while they are unaware?
043|067|On that Day, close friends will be enemies to each other, except for the righteous.
043|068|O My servants, there will be no fear or sorrow upon you that Day.
043|069|Those who believed in Our verses and submitted themselves.
043|070|Enter Paradise, you and your spouses, in happiness and delight.
043|071|Circulated among them are dishes and goblets of gold, and all that the soul could desire, and the eyes could delight in will be yours. You will reside there forever.
043|072|This is the Paradise which you’ve inherited because of what you used to do.
043|073|Therein for you are plentiful fruits, from which you eat.
043|074|Surely, for the wrongdoers, they will suffer the unending torment of Hell.
043|075|It won’t be lightened for them, and they will despair therein.
043|076|We didn’t wrong them, but they were the wrongdoers.
043|077|They will cry out: “O Malik, let your Lord end us!” He will say, “You are staying.”
043|078|Surely, We brought you the truth, but most of you hate the truth.
043|079|Did they devise a plan? We, too, are planning.
043|080|Or do they think that We don’t hear their secrets and their private conversations? Indeed, Our messengers, with them, are recording.
043|081|Say, “If the Merciful had a child, I would be the first to worship.”
043|082|Glory be to the Lord of the heavens and the earth, the Lord of the Throne, far beyond what they attribute to Him.
043|083|Let them chatter and play until they meet their promised Day.
043|084|He is Allah in the heavens and Allah on earth. He is the All-Wise, the All-Knowing.
043|085|Blessed is He who holds dominion over the heavens, the earth, and all that is between them. With Him is the knowledge of the Hour, and you will be returned to Him.
043|086|None of those they call upon besides Him has any power of intercession, except those who testify to the truth knowingly.
043|087|If you were to ask them, “Who created them?” they would reply, “Allah.” How, then, are they deluded?
043|088|Regarding his statement, “O my Lord, these are people who don’t believe.”
043|089|Pardon them, and say, “Peace.” Soon they will find out.
044|001|Ha, Meem.
044|002|By the clear, enlightening Scripture.
044|003|We revealed it on a blessed night—We’ve been warning.
044|004|On that night, every wise matter is made distinct.
044|005|A command from Us—We’ve been sending messengers.
044|006|As a mercy from your Lord—He is the All-Hearing, the All-Knowing.
044|007|The Lord of the heavens and the earth, and all that’s between them—if you are certain.
044|008|There is no god but He. He gives life and causes death—your Lord and the Lord of your ancestors.
044|009|Still, they are playing in doubt.
044|010|Await the day when the sky will bring visible smoke.
044|011|It will envelop the people: this is a painful punishment.
044|012|“Our Lord, lift from us the punishment; we are believers.”
044|013|How can there be a reminder for them, since a clear Messenger has already come to them?
044|014|Yet they turned away from him and said, “He is tutored, a madman.”
044|015|We will withdraw the punishment a little. But you will surely return.
044|016|The Day We will strike with the greatest assault—We will take revenge.
044|017|Before them, We tested the people of Pharaoh, when a noble messenger came to them.
044|018|“Hand over to me Allah’s servants. I am definitely a reliable messenger to you.
044|019|And don’t exalt yourselves against Allah; I’ve come to you with clear authority.
044|020|I have sought refuge in my Lord and your Lord, lest you stone me.
044|021|If you don’t believe me, then keep your distance from me.”
044|022|Then, he implored his Lord, “These are criminal people.”
044|023|“Depart with My servants by night—you will be pursued.
044|024|And leave the sea in stillness; they are soldiers to be drowned.”
044|025|How many gardens and springs did they leave behind?
044|026|And fields and noble sites.
044|027|And comfort wherein they were amused.
044|028|Thus, and We made it an inheritance for another people.
044|029|Neither heaven nor earth wept for them, nor were they reprieved.
044|030|We rescued the Children of Israel from the degrading torment.
044|031|From Pharaoh. He was a tyrant, an oppressor.
044|032|And We knowingly chose them over the worlds.
044|033|We gave them signs in which there were transparent trials.
044|034|Yet these people say:
044|035|“There is only our first death, and we won’t be resurrected.
044|036|Then bring back our ancestors, if you are truthful.”
044|037|Are they better than the people of Tubba and those before them? We destroyed them because they were criminals.
044|038|We didn’t create the heavens, the earth, and everything in between in play.
044|039|We created them only in truth, but most of them don’t know.
044|040|The Day of Decision is their appointed time, all of them.
044|041|The Day when no relation will avail a relation at all, nor will they be helped.
044|042|Except those on whom Allah has mercy. He is the Mighty, the Merciful.
044|043|The Tree of Bitterness.
044|044|Food of the sinners.
044|045|Like molten brass, it boils in the bellies.
044|046|Like the boiling of seething water.
044|047|“Grab him and drag him into the middle of the Hellfire.
044|048|Then, pour over his head from the suffering of the Inferno.
044|049|Taste! For you are the mighty, the noble one!
044|050|This is what you used to question.”
044|051|As for the righteous, they will be in a safe place.
044|052|Amid gardens and springs.
044|053|Clothed in fine silk and heavy brocade, facing each other.
044|054|Thus. And We will pair them with pure companions with beautiful eyes.
044|055|They will call for fruit therein, in peace and tranquility.
044|056|Therein, they will taste no death, beyond the first death. And He will shield them from the torment of Hellfire.
044|057|As a bounty from your Lord. That is the grand success.
044|058|We’ve made it easy in your language, so they may reflect.
044|059|So, wait. They too are waiting.
045|001|Ha. Meem.
045|002|This Book is a revelation from Allah, the Almighty, the All-Wise.
045|003|In the heavens and the earth are signs for the believers.
045|004|And in your creation, and in the various kinds of creatures He scattered, are signs for people who are sure.
045|005|And in the alternation of night and day, in the sustenance that Allah sends down from the sky, reviving the earth after its death, and in His control of the winds, there are signs for people who reason.
045|006|These are Allah’s verses which We convey to you in truth. So, in what message, after Allah and His verses, will they believe?
045|007|Woe to every liar, sinful fabricator.
045|008|Who hears Allah’s verses recited to him, persists in arrogance, as if he didn’t hear them. Inform him of a painful punishment.
045|009|When he becomes aware of some of Our verses, he mocks them. For them, there is a humiliating punishment.
045|010|Ahead of them lies Hell. Neither their wealth nor their allies besides Allah will avail them anything. For them, there is a tremendous punishment.
045|011|This is guidance. Those who reject their Lord’s signs will have a severe punishment of a humiliating nature.
045|012|It is Allah who made the sea submissive to you, so that ships may traverse it by His decree, and you may seek His bounty, and perhaps you may express gratitude.
045|013|He made everything in the heavens and on earth subservient to you—all is from Him. In this, there are signs for those who reflect.
045|014|Tell those who believe to forgive those who don’t anticipate the days of Allah, for He repays people according to their deeds.
045|015|Whoever works righteousness, it is for the good of his own soul; and whoever does evil, it is upon it. Then to your Lord you will be returned.
045|016|We gave the Children of Israel the Scripture, wisdom, and prophethood; and We provided them with good things, and We favored them above all other nations.
045|017|We provided them with clear proofs of the matter. They only began to dispute after knowledge came to them—out of mutual jealousy. Your Lord will judge between them on Resurrection Day regarding their disputes.
045|018|Then We set you on the path of the ordinance, so follow it, and don’t follow the whims of those who don’t know.
045|019|They won’t be able to protect you from Allah in anything. The wrongdoers are allies of each other, but Allah is the Ally of the righteous.
045|020|These are insights for humankind, guidance, and mercy for people who have unwavering faith.
045|021|Do those who commit evil deeds think that We will make them like those who have believed and done righteous deeds, both in their life and after their death? How ill they judge!
045|022|Allah created the heavens and the earth with truth. Each soul will be repaid for what it has earned, and they won’t be wronged.
045|023|Have you seen him who takes his own desires as his god? Allah, knowingly, allows him to stray, seals his hearing and heart, and places a covering over his sight. Who, then, can guide him after Allah? Won’t you then reflect?
045|024|They assert, “There is nothing but our worldly life; we live and we die, and time alone destroys us.” But they have no knowledge of this; they are only guessing.
045|025|When Our clear verses are presented to them, their only argument is, “Bring our ancestors back, if you are truthful.”
045|026|Say, “Allah gives you life, then makes you die, then gathers you for the Day of Resurrection, about which there is no doubt. But most people don’t know.”
045|027|To Allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth. On the Day when the Hour is established, on that day, those who falsify will lose.
045|028|You will see every community kneeling, every community will be called to its record. “Today, you are being recompensed for what you used to do.
045|029|This is our record which speaks against you with truth. We were recording what you used to do.”
045|030|Then, as for those who believed and did righteous deeds, their Lord will admit them into His Mercy. That is the clear triumph.
045|031|As for those who disbelieved: “Weren’t My verses recited to you, but you were arrogant and were guilty people?”
045|032|When it was said, “Allah’s promise is true, and there is no doubt about the Hour,” you said, “We don’t know what the Hour is. We conceive it as nothing more than speculation, and we aren’t sure.”
045|033|The evils of what they earned will appear to them, and what they used to mock will surround them.
045|034|And it will be said, “Today, We will forget you, as you forgot the meeting of this Day. And your dwelling will be the Fire, and you will have no helpers.
045|035|That is because you took Allah’s verses lightly and the worldly life deceived you.” So today, they won’t be removed from it, nor will they be given the opportunity to make amends.
045|036|So, to Allah be all praise, Lord of the heavens and Lord of the earth, Lord of the worlds.
045|037|And His is the greatness in the heavens and the earth, and He is the Mighty, the All-Wise.
046|001|Ha. Meem.
046|002|This Book is a revelation from Allah, the Almighty, the All-Wise.
046|003|We didn’t create the heavens, the earth, and all that lies between them except in truth and for a specified term. Yet, those who disbelieve turn away from the warnings they receive.
046|004|Say, “Did you consider those you call upon besides Allah? Show me what they’ve created on earth, or do they possess a share in the heavens? Bring me a book from before this one, or any vestige of knowledge, if you are truthful.”
046|005|Who is more misguided than one who prays to others besides Allah—those who won’t respond to them until the Day of Resurrection, and they are oblivious of their prayers?
046|006|When humanity is gathered, they will become their enemies and deny their worship of them.
046|007|When Our clear verses are presented to them, those who disbelieve say of the truth when it reaches them, “This is obvious sorcery.”
046|008|Or do they say, “He invented it”? Say, “If I invented it, you have no power to protect me from Allah. He is fully aware of what you engage in. He is sufficient as a witness between me and you. He is the Forgiving, the Merciful.”
046|009|Say, “I am not a novelty among the messengers, and I don’t know what will happen to me or to you. I only follow what’s revealed to me and am simply a clear warner.”
046|010|Say, “Consider, if it’s from Allah and you reject it, and a witness from the Children of Israel bore witness to the like of it and believed in it; yet you are arrogant. Allah doesn’t guide the wrongdoing people.”
046|011|The unbelievers say of the believers, “If it held any merit, they wouldn’t have preceded us to it.” And since they don’t receive guidance from it, they say, “This is an ancient fabrication.”
046|012|Before it, the Scripture of Moses, as a guide and a mercy. And this is a confirming Scripture, in the Arabic language, to warn those who do wrong, and as good news to the doers of good.
046|013|Those who say, “Our Lord is Allah,” and then go straight, will have no fear, nor will they grieve.
046|014|These are the inhabitants of Paradise, dwelling therein eternally, as a reward for their deeds.
046|015|We commanded the human being to care for his parents. His mother bore him with hardship and gave birth to him with hardship. His pregnancy and nursing total thirty months. When he reaches his prime at forty, he prays, “My Lord, grant me the ability to be grateful for the blessings You’ve bestowed upon me and upon my parents, and to perform righteous deeds that please You. And make my offspring virtuous. I turn to You in repentance, and I am among those who submit.”
046|016|These are the ones from whom We accept the best of what they did, and whose misdeeds We overlook—among the inhabitants of Paradise. The true promise which they had been promised.
046|017|However, the one who says to his parents, “Enough of you! Are you threatening me with resurrection, even though generations have passed before me?” And they both appeal to Allah for help, “Woe to you! Believe! The promise of Allah is true!” Yet, he replies, “This is nothing but tales of the ancients.”
046|018|Such individuals are on par with the previous generations of jinn and humans; they are the losers.
046|019|Everyone will be ranked according to their deeds, so that He may fully compensate them for their deeds, and they won’t be wronged.
046|020|On the Day when those who disbelieved are presented before the Fire: “You used up your good things during your worldly life and enjoyed them. So today, you will receive a shameful punishment for your unwarranted arrogance on earth and due to your sinful deeds.”
046|021|Mention the brother of Aad, when he warned his people amidst the dunes. Numerous warners had come before and after him, saying, “worship only God; I fear for you the punishment of a momentous day.”
046|022|They responded, “Did you come to steer us away from our gods? So bring us what you promise us, if you are truthful.
046|023|He replied, “The knowledge of that is with Allah alone, and I only convey to you what I was sent with. But I see that you are a people behaving ignorantly.”
046|024|When they saw a cloud approaching their valleys, they exclaimed, “This cloud will bring us rain!” But it was what they had requested: a storm wind in which is painful punishment.
046|025|It destroyed everything by the command of its Lord. By morning, nothing could be seen, except their dwellings. Thus We recompense the guilty people.
046|026|We had empowered them, just as We empowered you, giving them hearing, sight, and intellect. However, their hearing, sight, and intellect availed them not when they rejected Allah’s signs. And they were surrounded by what they used to mock.
046|027|We’ve destroyed communities around you, and We displayed various signs, so they may return.
046|028|Why then didn’t those whom they took to draw them closer to Allah come to their aid? They abandoned them, for they were merely their own fabrication.
046|029|When We sent a group of jinn towards you, listened to the Quran. Upon their arrival, they said to each other, “Pay attention!” When the recitation was completed, they went back to their own people as warners.
046|030|They declared, “O our people, we’ve heard a scripture revealed after Moses; it confirms what preceded it; it guides to the truth and to a straight path.
046|031|O our people, Respond to Allah’s caller, and have faith in Him. He will absolve you of your sins and shield you from a painful punishment.”
046|032|Those who don’t respond to Allah’s call can’t escape on earth, nor will they have any protectors besides Him. Such are clearly in misguidance.
046|033|Don’t they realize that Allah, who created the heavens and the earth, and was not tired by their creation, is able to give life to the dead? Indeed, He has power over everything.
046|034|On the Day when those who disbelieved are presented before the Fire: “Isn’t this real?” They will answer, “Yes, by our Lord.” He will then say, “So taste the punishment because you disbelieved.”
046|035|Therefore, endure with patience, as did the messengers of strong will, and don’t be hasty regarding them. On the Day they witness what they were warned about, it will appear to them as if they had stayed only for an hour of a day. This is a message to be delivered: will any be destroyed except the defiantly disobedient people?
047|001|Those who disbelieve and hinder others from Allah’s path—He leads their deeds astray.
047|002|Those who believe, perform good deeds, and have faith in what has been revealed to Muhammad—which is the truth from their Lord—He removes their sins and heals their minds.
047|003|This is because those who disbelieve pursue falsehood, while the believers adhere to the truth from their Lord. Thus, Allah presents to people their respective examples.
047|004|When you confront the unbelievers, strike the necks. Once you’ve thoroughly subdued them, tighten their bonds. Then, release them graciously or after obtaining a ransom—until the war lays down its burdens. If Allah had willed, He could’ve taken vengeance on them Himself, but He tests some of you through others. Those who are killed in Allah’s cause, He won’t let their deeds be wasted.
047|005|He will guide them and heal their minds.
047|006|And He will admit them into Paradise, which He made known to them.
047|007|O you who believe, if you support Allah, He will help you and solidify your foothold.
047|008|But those who disbelieve, for them is ruin, and He will invalidate their actions.
047|009|This is because they detest what Allah revealed, so He invalidates their deeds.
047|010|Didn’t they travel through the earth and observe the fate of those before them? Allah poured destruction upon them, and for the unbelievers is a similar fate.
047|011|This is because Allah is the Protector of those who believe, while the unbelievers have no protector.
047|012|Allah will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into Gardens through which rivers flow. But those who disbelieve, they enjoy themselves and eat as animals eat. Their final dwelling is the Fire.
047|013|How many a city, stronger than your city which expelled you, did We demolish? And there was no helper for them.
047|014|Is he who stands on clear proof from his Lord, like those whose evil deeds are made attractive to them, and they follow their desires?
047|015|The portrayal of Paradise promised to the righteous is where rivers of water never alter, and rivers of milk that never change its taste, and rivers of wine pleasurable to those who drink, and rivers of purified honey. They will have all kinds of fruits, as well as forgiveness from their Lord. Can this be compared to one who will dwell eternally in the Fire, forced to drink scalding water that tears their intestines apart?
047|016|Some of them listen to you. But when they leave your presence, they ask those endowed with knowledge, “What did he just say?” These are the ones Allah has set a seal on their hearts, and they follow their own desires.
047|017|As for those who are guided, He increases their guidance and grants them their righteousness.
047|018|Are they waiting for the Hour to come upon them suddenly? Its signs have already appeared. Once it is upon them, what good will their reminder be?
047|019|Seek forgiveness for your sins and the believing men and women. Allah knows your movements and your resting places.
047|020|Those who believe say, “If only a chapter were revealed.” Yet, when a decisive chapter is revealed, and fighting is mentioned in it, you see those with a sickness in their hearts staring at you, as though they are on the verge of death. It would’ve been better for them.
047|021|Obedience and truthful speech. Once the matter has been finalized—if they were sincere to Allah, it would’ve been better for them.
047|022|However, if you turn away, you risk causing corruption on earth and severing your familial ties.
047|023|These are the ones Allah has cursed, so He deafened them and blinded their sight.
047|024|Don’t they ponder over the Quran? Or are there locks upon the hearts?
047|025|Those who revert after guidance has become clear to them—Satan has enticed and given them latitude.
047|026|That is because they said to those who hated what Allah revealed, “We will obey you in some matters.” And Allah knows their secrets.
047|027|How will it be, when the angels take them in death, beating their faces and their backs.
047|028|This is because they pursued what angers Allah, and they hated His approval, so He nullified their deeds.
047|029|Or do those who have a disease in their hearts think that Allah won’t expose their malice?
047|030|If We had willed, We would’ve shown them to you, and then you would’ve identified them by their marks. But you will recognize them by the tone of their speech. And Allah knows your deeds.
047|031|We will surely test you, until We ascertain those among you who strive their best, and the patient ones, and We will test your reports.
047|032|Those who disbelieve, deter others from Allah’s path, and oppose the Messenger after guidance has become clear to them, won’t harm Allah in the slightest. He will nullify their deeds.
047|033|O you who believe, obey Allah and the Messenger, and don’t invalidate your deeds.
047|034|Those who disbelieve, hinder others from Allah’s path, and die as unbelievers: Allah won’t forgive them.
047|035|So don’t slacken and call for peace while you have the upper hand. Allah is with you, and He will not undermine your deeds.
047|036|The life of this world is but a game and distraction. However, if you believe and act righteously, He will give you your rewards, and He won’t ask you for your possessions.
047|037|If He were to demand it from you, and press upon you, you would become stingy, and He will bring out your ill-wills.
047|038|Here you are, being called upon to spend in the way of Allah, and some among you are being stingy. Whoever holds back, it’s to his loss. Allah is the Rich, and you are the needy. If you turn away, He will replace you with other people, and they will not be like you.
048|001|We paved the way for you towards a clear victory.
048|002|So that Allah may forgive your past and future sins, complete His blessings upon you, and guide you along a straight path.
048|003|And that Allah may aid you with strong support.
048|004|It is He who sends tranquility into the hearts of the believers, to strengthen their faith. To Allah belong the forces of the heavens and the earth. Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise.
048|005|He will admit the believing men and women into Gardens beneath which rivers flow, to dwell therein forever, and He will absolve their sins. This, in the sight of Allah, is the ultimate triumph.
048|006|And He will punish the hypocritical men and women, and the polytheistic men and women, who harbor ill thoughts about Allah. They are wrapped in wickedness, and Allah is angry with them, has cursed them, and prepared Hell for them—a terrible fate.
048|007|To Allah belong the forces of the heavens and the earth. Allah is All-Powerful, All-Wise.
048|008|We sent you as a witness, a herald of good news, and a warner.
048|009|So that you may believe in Allah and His Messenger, endorse him, respect him, and glorify Him morning and evening.
048|010|Those who pledge allegiance to you are, in essence, pledging allegiance to Allah. The hand of Allah is above their hands. Whoever breaks his pledge, breaks it to his own harm. And whoever fulfills his covenant with Allah, He will grant him a magnificent reward.
048|011|The Desert Arabs who remained behind will say to you, “Our properties and our families occupied us, so seek forgiveness for us.” They say with their tongues what is not in their hearts. Say, “Who can protect you from Allah if He intends harm or benefit for you?” Allah is fully informed of what you do.
048|012|You assumed that the Messenger and the believers would not return to their families, which delighted your hearts. You harbored malicious thoughts, and thus, became doomed people.
048|013|Those who reject Allah and His Messenger—We’ve prepared a blazing fire for the unbelievers.
048|014|To Allah belongs the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth. He forgives whom He wills, and He punishes whom He wills. Allah is All-Forgiving and Merciful.
048|015|When you set out to collect the gains, those who had lagged said, “Allow us to accompany you.” They wish to change Allah’s words. Say, “You won’t accompany us; Allah has already decreed this.” Then they will say, “You are jealous of us.” But in reality, they understand very little.
048|016|Tell the Desert Arabs who stayed behind, “You will be called to a people of great warfare; you will fight them, unless they surrender. If you obey, Allah will grant you generous compensation. But if you turn away, as you did previously, He will inflict a severe punishment upon you.”
048|017|There is no blame for the blind, nor any blame for the lame, nor any blame for the sick. Whoever obeys Allah and His Messenger: He will admit him into Gardens through which rivers flow. But whoever turns away, He will inflict upon him a painful punishment.
048|018|Allah was pleased with the believers when they pledged their allegiance to you beneath the tree. He knew what was in their hearts, so He sent tranquility down upon them, and He rewarded them with a near victory.
048|019|Furthermore, they were destined to seize abundant gains. Allah is Mighty and Wise.
048|020|Allah has promised you numerous spoils that you will acquire, and He expedited this for you, restraining people’s hands from you, serving as a sign for the believers, and to guide you along a straight path.
048|021|There are others that you couldn’t reach, but Allah encompassed them. Allah has power over everything.
048|022|If the unbelievers had fought you, they would’ve turned their backs, then they wouldn’t find a protector or helper.
048|023|This is the consistent way of Allah, unchanging throughout history. You will never find a change in Allah’s way.
048|024|It is He who withheld their hands from you, and your hands from them, in the heart of Mecca, after He had made you victorious over them. Allah is ever watchful of your actions.
048|025|They are the ones who disbelieved, barred you from the Sacred Mosque, and prevented the offering from reaching its destination. If not for certain believing men and women, unknown to you, whom you might have inadvertently harmed, Allah would have allowed harm to befall them. But Allah brings into His mercy whom He wills. Had they been separated, We would’ve punished those among them who disbelieved with a great punishment.
048|026|The unbelievers harbor deep-seated prejudice—the zealotry of the Age of Ignorance. Yet, Allah sent down His tranquility upon His Messenger and the believers, and He committed them to the word of righteousness, which they were most worthy and deserving of. Allah is fully aware of everything.
048|027|Allah has fulfilled His Messenger’s vision in truth: “You will enter the Sacred Mosque, if Allah wills, in security, with your heads shaven or hair shortened, without fear.” He knew what you knew not, and besides that, He has prepared a close victory.
048|028|It is He who sent His Messenger with guidance and the religion of truth, to make it prevail over all religions. Allah is sufficient as a Witness.
048|029|Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah. Those with him are stern with the unbelievers, compassionate among themselves. You see them bowing and prostrating, seeking grace and approval from Allah. Their marks are on their faces from the effects of prostration. This is their description in the Torah and the Gospel: like a seed that sprouts, grows, strengthens, thickens, and then stands firm on its stem, delighting the sowers. He enrages the unbelievers with them. Allah has promised those among them who believe and do righteous deeds, forgiveness and a great reward.
049|001|O you who believe, don’t place your opinions above those of Allah and His Messenger. Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.
049|002|O you who have faith, don’t raise your voices above the Prophet’s, and don’t speak to him in a loud voice as you speak loudly to one another, lest your deeds become nullified without your awareness.
049|003|Those who lower their voices in Allah’s Messenger’s presence are the ones whose hearts have been tested for piety. For them, it is forgiveness and a substantial reward.
049|004|Those who call you from behind the private apartments—most of them don’t understand.
049|005|If they had waited patiently until you could come out to them, it would’ve been better for them. But Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
049|006|O you who believe, if a sinner brings you information, verify it, lest you harm people out of ignorance and later regret your actions.
049|007|Know that the Messenger of Allah is among you. If he were to obey you in many matters, you would face difficulty. But Allah has endeared faith to you and beautified it in your hearts. And He made disbelief, wickedness, and disobedience hateful to you. These are the rightly guided.
049|008|This is Allah’s grace and favor. Allah is All-Knowing, Most Wise.
049|009|If two groups of believers quarrel, reconcile them. But if one transgresses against the other, fight the one which oppresses until it complies with Allah’s command. Once it does, reconcile them justly and impartially. Allah loves those who are just.
049|010|The believers are brethren, make peace among your brethren, and fear Allah, so that you may receive mercy.
049|011|O you who believe, let no group mock another; they may be better than them. Nor let women mock other women; they may be better than them. Don’t defame each other or use offensive nicknames. It is wrong to act defiantly after having faith. Those who don’t repent are the wrongdoers.
049|012|O you who believe, avoid most suspicion, for some suspicions are sinful. Don’t spy or backbite each other. Would any of you like to eat the flesh of his dead brother? Surely, you would hate it. Fear Allah. Allah is Accepting of repentance, Most Merciful.
049|013|O people, We created you from a male and a female, and We made you into nations and cultures, so you may learn from each other. The most noble among you in the sight of Allah is the most righteous. Allah is All-Knowing, Expert.
049|014|The Desert Arabs say, “We have believed.” Say, “You haven’t yet believed, but say instead, ‘We have submitted,’ for faith has not yet entered your hearts. If you obey Allah and His Messenger, He won’t diminish anything from your deeds. Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.”
049|015|The believers are those who believe in Allah and His Messenger, who harbor no doubt, and strive with their possessions and their selves in Allah’s cause. These are the truthful ones.
049|016|Say, “Do you presume to instruct Allah about your religion, when Allah knows everything in the heavens and on earth, and Allah is aware of all things?”
049|017|They regard their submission as a favor to you. Say, “Don’t regard your submission as a favor to me. Rather, it is Allah who granted you a favor by guiding you to the faith, if you are truthful.”
049|018|Allah knows the unseen realities of the heavens and the earth. Allah is All-Seeing of everything you do.
050|001|Qaf. By the glorious Quran.
050|002|They marvel that a warner has emerged from their midst. The unbelievers exclaim, “This is a strange thing.
050|003|When we have died and become dust? That is a far return.”
050|004|We know what the earth diminishes from them, and we have a preserving Book.
050|005|They’ve denied the truth when it came to them; thus, they are in a state of confusion.
050|006|Didn’t they observe the sky above them—how We constructed it, decorated it, and it has no cracks?
050|007|And the Earth—we expanded it, and placed upon it firm mountains, and made everything on it grow in a balanced way.
050|008|Insight and a reminder for every devoted servant.
050|009|And We send down from the sky blessed water, with which We produce gardens and grains of harvest.
050|010|And tall palm trees with clusters of dates.
050|011|This sustenance is for humankind. And with it, We revive barren land. Similarly, will be the resurrection.
050|012|Before them, the people of Noah, the residents of Ar-Rass, and Thamud denied the truth.
050|013|So did Aad, Pharaoh, and the brethren of Lot.
050|014|The inhabitants of the Forest and the people of Tubba also rejected the messengers. So My promise was justified.
050|015|Were We exhausted by the first creation? Yet they are in confusion about a new creation.
050|016|We created man, and We know what his soul whispers to him. We are closer to him than his jugular vein.
050|017|As the two receivers receive, seated on the right and left.
050|018|Every word he utters is noted by a vigilant scribe nearby.
050|019|The stupor of death arrives: “This is what you attempted to evade.”
050|020|And the trumpet will be blown. This is the Day of Promise.
050|021|And every soul will come, with it an usher and a witness.
050|022|“You were neglectful of this, so We’ve removed your veil, and your sight today is iron.”
050|023|And his companion will say, “This is what’s with me, prepared.”
050|024|“Throw in Hell every stubborn unbeliever.
050|025|Obstructor of good, aggressor, doubter.
050|026|Who set up another god alongside Allah, so throw him into severe suffering.”
050|027|His attendant will say, “Our Lord, I didn’t make him transgress, but he was far astray.”
050|028|He will say, “Don’t feud in my presence—I had already given you the warning.
050|029|My word cannot be changed, and I am not unjust to the beings.”
050|030|On that Day, We will ask Hell, “Are you filled?” And it will reply, “Are there still more?”
050|031|And Paradise will be brought near to the righteous, not far away.
050|032|“This is what you were promised—for every penitent preserver.
050|033|Who revered the Most Merciful in secret and came with a repentant heart.
050|034|Enter it in peace and security. This is the Day of Eternity.”
050|035|For them there is whatever they wish therein, and with Us is even more.
050|036|How many generations, stronger than them, did We destroy before them? They explored the lands—was there any escape?
050|037|In this, there is a lesson for whoever has a heart, who listens attentively and bears witness.
050|038|We created the heavens, the earth, and everything between them in six periods, and no fatigue touched Us.
050|039|Patiently endure what they say, and glorify the praise of your Lord before the rising of the sun and before its setting.
050|040|And exalt Him during the night, and after the prostrations.
050|041|And listen on the Day when the caller calls from a place nearby.
050|042|The Day when they will hear the blast in truth, that is the Day of Emergence.
050|043|It’s We who give life and cause death, and to Us is the destination.
050|044|The Day when the earth will crack open before them, hastening forth. That gathering is easy for Us.
050|045|We are better informed about what they say, and you’re not a tyrant over them. But remind with the Quran whoever fears My warning.
051|001|By the scatterers dispersing.
051|002|And the burden-bearers.
051|003|And those gliding with ease.
051|004|And those distributing commands.
051|005|What you’ve been promised is true.
051|006|Judgment will take place.
051|007|By the woven sky.
051|008|You have conflicting views.
051|009|From it, the deviators deviate.
051|010|Perish the falsifiers.
051|011|Those entangled in confusion and delusion.
051|012|They ask, “When is Judgment Day?”
051|013|The Day they will be tried over the Fire.
051|014|“Taste your ordeal. This is what you sought to expedite.”
051|015|The righteous will be in gardens and springs.
051|016|Receiving what their Lord has given them, for they were good doers before that.
051|017|They hardly slept during the night.
051|018|And at dawn, they would ask for forgiveness.
051|019|And in their wealth was a known right for the asker and the deprived.
051|020|On earth are signs for the convinced.
051|021|And within yourselves—don’t you see?
051|022|In the heavens is your sustenance, as promised.
051|023|By the Lord of heavens and earth: this is as true as your speaking.
051|024|Did you hear the story of Abraham’s honored guests?
051|025|They entered upon him and said, “Peace.” He replied, “Peace, strangers.”
051|026|Then he went to his family and brought a fattened calf.
051|027|He placed it before them and said, “Will you not eat?”
051|028|Sensing their discomfort, they reassured him, “Fear not.” And they gave him the good news of a knowledgeable son.
051|029|His wife approached in astonishment, slapped her face, and said, “A barren old woman?”
051|030|They responded, “So said your Lord. Indeed, He is the Wise, the Knowing.”
051|031|He asked, “What’s your business, O messengers?”
051|032|They replied, “We’ve been sent to a guilty people.
051|033|To unleash upon them stones of clay.
051|034|Marked by your Lord for the transgressors.”
051|035|So, we evacuated those of the believers who were there.
051|036|In it, we found only one household of the submissive.
051|037|We left in it a sign for those who fear the dreadful punishment.
051|038|Also, in Moses, We sent him to Pharaoh with apparent authority.
051|039|But he turned away with his chiefs and said, “A magician or a madman!”
051|040|So, We seized him and his troops, and We threw them into the sea, and he was to blame.
051|041|Also, in Aad, when We sent against them the barren wind.
051|042|It left nothing it came upon but made it like disintegrated ruins.
051|043|And in Thamud, when they were told, “Enjoy yourselves for a while.”
051|044|They defied their Lord’s command, so the thunderbolt seized them while they looked on.
051|045|They were unable to rise, nor could they defend themselves.
051|046|And the people of Noah before them. They were a sinful people.
051|047|We built the universe with power, and We are expanding it.
051|048|And We spread the earth; how excellent are We as spreaders!
051|049|Of all things, we created pairs, so you may reflect.
051|050|“So flee towards Allah. I am to you from Him a clear warner.”
051|051|“And don’t set up any other deity with Allah. I am to you from Him a clear warner.”
051|052|Likewise, no messenger came to those before them, but they said, “A magician, or a madman.”
051|053|Did they pass it down among themselves? They are defiant people.
051|054|So, distance yourself from them; you are not to blame.
051|055|And remind, for the reminder benefits the believers.
051|056|I didn’t create jinn and humans except to worship Me.
051|057|I don’t need their provision, nor do I need them to feed Me.
051|058|Allah is the Provider, the Possessor of Power, and the Firm.
051|059|Those who do wrong will meet the same fate as their predecessors, so let them not hasten Me.
051|060|So woe to those who disbelieve, for they will meet their promised Day.
052|001|By the Mount.
052|002|And a Scripture inscribed.
052|003|In a published scroll.
052|004|And the frequented House.
052|005|And the elevated roof.
052|006|And the surging sea.
052|007|The punishment of your Lord will occur.
052|008|No one can avert it.
052|009|On the Day when the heavens sways in agitation.
052|010|And the mountains are set in motion.
052|011|Woe, on that Day, to the deniers.
052|012|Those who are engrossed in vanity.
052|013|On that Day, they will be pushed into the Fire of Hell.
052|014|“This is the very Fire which you used to deny.
052|015|Is this magic, or do you not see?
052|016|Burn therein, it’s the same for you whether you bear it patiently, or not. You are only being recompensed for what you used to do.
052|017|However, the righteous will be in gardens of pleasure.
052|018|Delighted with what their Lord has given them, and their Lord has shielded them from the punishment of the Blaze.
052|019|“Eat and drink cheerfully, as a reward for your endeavors.”
052|020|Reclining on luxurious furnishings, We will pair them with splendid companions.
052|021|Those who believed and whose descendants followed them in faith, We will join with them, their offspring, and We won’t reduce anything from their deeds. Every person is held in pledge for what he earned.
052|022|We will supply them with fruits and meats, as they desire.
052|023|Circulated among them will be a cup, causing neither vain talk nor sinful behavior.
052|024|They will be served by youthful attendants as hidden pearls.
052|025|They will approach one another, inquiring.
052|026|They will say, “Previously, we were anxious about our families.
052|027|But Allah blessed us and protected us from the torment of the Scorching Winds.
052|028|We used to pray to Him. He is the Benevolent, the Merciful.”
052|029|So, remind them. You are not, by the grace of your Lord, a fortune teller or insane.
052|030|Do they say, “A poet, we await his demise?”
052|031|Say, “Wait; I am waiting with you.”
052|032|Are their dreams prompting them to do this? Or are they rebellious people?
052|033|Or do they say, “He made it up”? They can’t be sure.
052|034|Then, let them produce a similar statement—if they are truthful.
052|035|Or were they created from nonexistence? Or are they the creators?
052|036|Or did they create the heavens and the earth? Certainly, they lack conviction.
052|037|Or do they possess your Lord’s treasures? Or are they the ones in control?
052|038|Or do they have a ladder by which they can listen in? Then, let their listener produce clear authority.
052|039|Or does He have daughters while you have sons?
052|040|Or is it that you ask them for a fee, so they are burdened by a debt?
052|041|Or do they know the Unseen, so they write it down?
052|042|Or are they plotting a scheme? But those who disbelieve are the ones trapped in their plot.
052|043|Or do they have a god other than Allah? Exalted is Allah, far above what they associate with Him.
052|044|Even if they were to see pieces of the sky falling, they would say, “Clouds, piled up.”
052|045|So, leave them until they encounter their Day, when they will be thunderstruck.
052|046|On that Day, their plotting won’t avail them, nor will they be helped.
052|047|For those who perpetrate injustice, there is a punishment even more severe, yet most of them are unaware.
052|048|Wait patiently for the judgment of your Lord; you are under Our vigilant observation. Praise your Lord when you arise.
052|049|And glorify Him during the night, and as the stars retreat.
053|001|By the star as it falls.
053|002|Your friend is neither misguided nor deceived.
053|003|Nor does he speak out of inclination.
053|004|It is but a revelation revealed.
053|005|Taught to him by the one intense in strength.
053|006|Endowed with wisdom; He positioned Himself.
053|007|While he was at the uppermost horizon.
053|008|Then he approached and descended.
053|009|And was at the distance of two bow lengths, or even nearer.
053|010|Then He revealed to His servant what He revealed.
053|011|The heart didn’t lie about what it saw.
053|012|Will you dispute with him over what he saw?
053|013|And he certainly saw him in another descent.
053|014|At the Lote Tree of the Ultimate Boundary.
053|015|Besides it is the Garden of Refuge.
053|016|When the Lote Tree was shrouded by what shrouded it.
053|017|The sight didn’t swerve, nor did it overstep.
053|018|Indeed, he did see, of the Greatest Signs, of his Lord.
053|019|Did you consider al-Lat and al-Uzza?
053|020|And Manat, the third one, the other?
053|021|So for you the male and for Him the female?
053|022|What a bizarre distribution!
053|023|These are nothing but names you named—you and your forefathers—without any authorization from Allah. They follow nothing except assumption and what the souls desire, even though guidance did come to them from their Lord.
053|024|Or is man to have whatever he desires?
053|025|But to Allah belong the afterlife and the first.
053|026|How many angels there are in the heavens, whose intercession would not benefit at all, except after Allah gives permission for whom He wills and approves.
053|027|Those who don’t believe in the Hereafter give the angels female names.
053|028|They don’t know of this. They follow not except assumption, and assumption avails not against the truth at all.
053|029|So turn away from whoever turns his back on Our message and desires nothing but the worldly life.
053|030|That’s the extent of their knowledge. Your Lord knows best who strays from His path and who is guided.
053|031|To Allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on earth—so He may recompense those who commit evil according to their deeds, and reward those who do good with the best.
053|032|Those who avoid major sins and immoralities—except for minor lapses—your Lord is vast in forgiveness. He knew you well, ever since He produced you from the earth, and when you were embryos in your mothers’ wombs. So don’t claim yourselves pure; He knows best who is righteous.
053|033|Did you see the one who turns away?
053|034|And gives a little, then withholds?
053|035|Does he possess knowledge of the unseen, giving him vision?
053|036|Or wasn’t he informed of what’s in the scriptures of Moses?
053|037|And of Abraham, who fulfilled?
053|038|That no bearer of burdens will bear the burden of another.
053|039|And that man attains only what he strives for.
053|040|And that his striving will soon be seen.
053|041|Then, he will be rewarded for it with the fullest reward.
053|042|And that to your Lord is the finality.
053|043|And that it is He who causes laughter and weeping.
053|044|And that it is He who causes death and gives life.
053|045|And that it is He who created the two pairs—male and female.
053|046|From a sperm-drop when it is emitted.
053|047|And that upon Him lies the Second Genesis.
053|048|And that it is He who enriches and causes want.
053|049|And that it is He who is the Lord of Sirius.
053|050|And that it is He who destroyed the first Aad.
053|051|And Thamud, and He didn’t spare anyone.
053|052|And the people of Noah before—they were even more unjust and transgressive.
053|053|And collapsed the ‘Overturned City’.
053|054|Then He covered it with what He covered.
053|055|So, which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
053|056|This is a warning, just like the previous ones.
053|057|The impending event is drawing near.
053|058|None other than Allah can reveal it.
053|059|Are you amazed by this discourse?
053|060|And do you laugh and not weep?
053|061|And you remain proudly indifferent?
053|062|So bow down before Allah, and worship!
054|001|The Hour has drawn near, and the moon has split.
054|002|Yet, when they witness a sign, they turn away and say, “Continuous magic.”
054|003|They deny and follow their whims, but all matters will be settled.
054|004|Numerous warnings have come to them, with messages of deterrence.
054|005|Profound wisdom, but the warnings are of no avail.
054|006|So, withdraw from them. The Day the Caller calls to a terrible thing.
054|007|Their eyes humbled, they will emerge from the graves, as if they were locusts spreading.
054|008|Rushing towards the Caller. The unbelievers will say, “This is a difficult day.”
054|009|The people of Noah denied before them. They denied Our servant and said, “A madman,” and he was rebuked.
054|010|So, he appealed to his Lord: “I am defeated, so help!”
054|011|Then We opened the doors of the sky with pouring water.
054|012|And We burst the earth with springs, and the waters converged for a purpose predestined.
054|013|And We carried him on a construction of planks and nails.
054|014|Sailing under Our observation—a recompense for him who had been rejected.
054|015|And We left it as a sign—is there anyone who will take notice?
054|016|So, how were My punishment and warnings?
054|017|We made the Quran easy to learn. Is there anyone who will learn?
054|018|Aad denied the truth. So, how were My punishment and warnings?
054|019|We unleashed upon them a screaming wind, on a day of continuous misfortune.
054|020|Plucking people up, as if they were trunks of palm trees uprooted.
054|021|So, how were My punishment and warnings?
054|022|We made the Quran easy to remember. Is there anyone who will remember?
054|023|Thamud rejected the warnings.
054|024|They questioned, “Are we to follow one man from among us? Surely, we would then be in error and insanity.
054|025|Was the message sent to him alone among us? He is a wicked liar.”
054|026|They will know tomorrow who the wicked liar is.
054|027|We are sending the she-camel as a test for them. So, observe them and be patient.
054|028|And inform them that the water is to be shared among them; each drink will be provided in turn.
054|029|Yet, they called their companion, and he dared and hamstrung.
054|030|So, how were My punishment and warnings?
054|031|We sent them a single shriek, and they became like crushed trampled straw.
054|032|We made the Quran easy to understand. Is there anyone who will understand?
054|033|The people of Lot denied the warnings.
054|034|We rained upon them a shower of stones, except for the family of Lot, We saved them early morning.
054|035|As a blessing from Us. Thus, do We reward those who give thanks.
054|036|He had warned them of Our onslaught, but they disputed the warnings.
054|037|They even demanded his guests from him, so We obliterated their eyes. “Taste My punishment and warnings.”
054|038|Morning brought them unrelenting suffering.
054|039|So taste My punishment and warnings.
054|040|We made the Quran easy to memorize. Is there anyone who will memorize?
054|041|Warnings had come to the House of Pharaoh.
054|042|They rejected all Our signs, so We seized them with the grip of an Almighty Omnipotent.
054|043|Are your unbelievers better than those? Or do you have immunity in the Scriptures?
054|044|Or do they say, “We are a united multitude, bound for victory”?
054|045|The multitude will be defeated, and they will turn their backs and flee.
054|046|Their appointed moment is the Hour. The Hour is most catastrophic and bitter.
054|047|The criminals are in disarray and madness.
054|048|On that Day, they will be pulled, face-down, into the Fire: “Taste the touch of Hell.”
054|049|We created everything according to a precise measure.
054|050|Our command is but one, as the blink of an eye.
054|051|We’ve destroyed the likes of you. Is there anyone who will reflect?
054|052|And everything they’ve done is in the records.
054|053|Every minor and major detail is written down.
054|054|The righteous will be in gardens and rivers.
054|055|In a seat of truth, in the presence of an Omnipotent King.
055|001|The Compassionate.
055|002|He taught the Quran.
055|003|He created the human being.
055|004|And He taught him eloquence.
055|005|The sun and the moon adhere to calculations.
055|006|The stars and the trees prostrate.
055|007|He raised the sky and established the balance.
055|008|So don’t upset the balance.
055|009|Maintain the weight with justice, and don’t fall short in the balance.
055|010|He spread out the earth for all creatures.
055|011|Within it are fruits and date palms bearing clusters of date.
055|012|And grains within husks, and aromatic herbs.
055|013|So, which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
055|014|He created man from clay, akin to pottery.
055|015|And He created the jinn from a scorching flame of fire.
055|016|So, which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
055|017|Lord of the two Easts and Lord of the two Wests.
055|018|So, which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
055|019|He released the two seas, meeting side by side.
055|020|Between them is a barrier they don’t transgress.
055|021|So, which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
055|022|From both of them emerge pearls and coral.
055|023|So, which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
055|024|His are the ships, towering on the sea like landmarks.
055|025|So, which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
055|026|Everyone on it will perish.
055|027|Only the presence of your Lord, full of majesty and honor, will remain.
055|028|So, which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
055|029|Everyone in the heavens and earth asks of Him. Every day, He is engaged in some affair.
055|030|So, which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
055|031|We will attend to you, O prominent species.
055|032|So, which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
055|033|O congregation of jinn and humans, if you can pass beyond the zones of the heavens and the earth, then pass. However, you can’t pass without authorization.
055|034|So, which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
055|035|You’ll be bombarded with a shower of flames and smoke, and you won’t succeed.
055|036|So, which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
055|037|When the sky is ripped apart, and it becomes a rose, like paint.
055|038|So, which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
055|039|On that Day, no man or jinn will be asked about his sins.
055|040|So, which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
055|041|The guilty will be recognized by their marks, and they’ll be seized by the forelocks and the feet.
055|042|So, which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
055|043|This is Hell, which the guilty denied.
055|044|They will circulate between it and a seething bath.
055|045|So, which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
055|046|But for anyone who fears standing before his Lord, there are two Gardens.
055|047|So, which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
055|048|Brimming with variety.
055|049|So, which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
055|050|In them, two springs are flowing.
055|051|So, which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
055|052|In them is every kind of fruit in pairs.
055|053|So, which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
055|054|Reclining on couches lined with brocade, the fruit of the two Gardens near at hand.
055|055|So, which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
055|056|Within them are maidens, restraining their glances, whom before them no man or jinni has deflowered.
055|057|So, which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
055|058|As if they were rubies and coral.
055|059|So, which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
055|060|Is there any reward for Good—other than Good?
055|061|So, which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
055|062|Beyond these, there exist two more gardens.
055|063|So, which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
055|064|Intensely dark green.
055|065|So, which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
055|066|Within them, two springs gushing abundantly.
055|067|So, which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
055|068|In them are fruits, date palms, and pomegranates.
055|069|So, which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
055|070|In them are good and beautiful women.
055|071|So, which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
055|072|With captivating eyes, secluded within pavilions.
055|073|So, which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
055|074|Untouched before by either man or jinn.
055|075|So, which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
055|076|Reclining on green cushions and splendid carpets.
055|077|So, which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
055|078|Blessed is the name of your Lord, possessor of Majesty and Honor.
056|001|When the Inevitability takes place.
056|002|There will be no denying its occurrence.
056|003|Lowering, elevating.
056|004|When the earth is violently shaken.
056|005|And the mountains are reduced to fine dust.
056|006|Becoming dispersed dust.
056|007|You will be sorted into three categories.
056|008|Those on the Right—what of those on the Right?
056|009|And those on the Left—what of those on the Left?
056|010|And the forerunners, the foremost.
056|011|Those drawn near.
056|012|In the Gardens of Delight.
056|013|A multitude from the earliest generations.
056|014|And a few from the later ones.
056|015|Upon ornate thrones.
056|016|Facing each other.
056|017|Eternalized youths will circulate among them.
056|018|With pitchers and cups filled with a crystal-clear drink.
056|019|Which neither induces headaches nor intoxication.
056|020|And fruits of whatever they choose.
056|021|And the meat of birds that they crave.
056|022|And beautiful companions.
056|023|Resembling pristine pearls.
056|024|As a recompense for what they used to do.
056|025|There, they will hear no idle or sinful speech.
056|026|Only the words: “Peace, Peace.”
056|027|And those on the Right—what of those on the Right?
056|028|Amidst lush gardens.
056|029|And blooming, fragrant flowers.
056|030|Under vast, plentiful shades.
056|031|With abundant poured out water.
056|032|And an abundance of fruit.
056|033|Unending and unrestricted.
056|034|And elevated mattresses.
056|035|We created them uniquely.
056|036|And made them virginal and pure.
056|037|Loving and of equal age.
056|038|For those on the Right.
056|039|A multitude from the earliest generations.
056|040|And a multitude from the later ones.
056|041|And those on the Left—what of those on the Left?
056|042|In scorching winds and scalding water.
056|043|Under the shadow of dense, black smoke.
056|044|Neither cool nor refreshing.
056|045|They were indulged in luxury before that.
056|046|And they persisted in immense wrongdoing.
056|047|And they used to say, “After we die and become dust and bones, will we be resurrected?
056|048|And our ancestors as well?”
056|049|Say, “Certainly, the earlier and later generations.
056|050|Will be gathered together for the scheduled meeting of a known day.”
056|051|Then you, O misguided deniers.
056|052|Will eat from the Tree of Bitterness.
056|053|You will fill your bellies with it.
056|054|Then, on top of it, you will drink boiling fluids.
056|055|Drinking as parched camels do.
056|056|This is their hospitality on the Day of Reckoning.
056|057|We created you; if only you would believe.
056|058|Did you observe what you ejaculate?
056|059|Is it you who create it, or are We the ones who create?
056|060|We decreed death among you, and We won’t be outdone.
056|061|In replacing you with others like you, and evolving you into forms beyond your comprehension.
056|062|You are familiar with the first formation; why, then, don’t you reflect?
056|063|Did you see the crops you cultivate?
056|064|Is it you who make them grow, or are We the Grower?
056|065|If We wished, We could turn it into dry stubble, so you would remain in wonder.
056|066|“We are indebted.
056|067|We are deprived.”
056|068|Did you see the water that you drink?
056|069|Is it you who bring it down from the clouds, or are We the Sender?
056|070|If We willed, We could make it bitter; why, then, don’t you give thanks?
056|071|Did you see the fire that you kindle?
056|072|Is it you who produce its tree, or are We the Producer?
056|073|We made it a reminder and a vital resource for the users.
056|074|So, glorify the name of your Lord, the Most Great.
056|075|I swear by the positions of the stars.
056|076|It is a most significant oath, if you only knew.
056|077|It is a noble Quran.
056|078|In a safeguarded Book.
056|079|None but the purified shall touch it.
056|080|A revelation from the Lord of the universes.
056|081|Do you take this message lightly?
056|082|And make its denial your livelihood?
056|083|Then why, when it reaches the throat?
056|084|And you are intently watching at that moment.
056|085|We are closer to it than you are, yet you don’t perceive.
056|086|If you’re not to be held accountable.
056|087|Then bring it back, if what you say is true.
056|088|And if he was of those brought near.
056|089|Then pleasure, fragrance, and a Garden of Delight.
056|090|And if he is among those of the Right.
056|091|Then, “Peace to you,” from those of the Right.
056|092|And if he is among the deniers, the misguided.
056|093|Then hospitality of scalding water.
056|094|And immersion in a Blaze.
056|095|This is the absolute truth.
056|096|So, glorify the name of your Lord, the Magnificent.
057|001|Everything in the heavens and the earth praises Allah, the Almighty, the All-Wise.
057|002|His reign extends over the heavens and the earth. He gives life and causes death, and He has power over everything.
057|003|He is the First and the Last, the Outward and the Inward, and He knows everything.
057|004|It is He who created the heavens and the earth in six periods and then established Himself on the Throne. He knows what penetrates the earth and what emerges from it, what descends from the sky, and what ascends into it. He is with you wherever you may be, and Allah sees everything you do.
057|005|To Him belongs the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth. And to Allah, all matters are returned.
057|006|He merges night into day, day into night; He is fully aware of the innermost secrets of the hearts.
057|007|Believe in Allah and His Messenger, and spend from what He made you successors in. Those among you who believe and donate will have a great reward.
057|008|Why wouldn’t you believe in Allah, when the Messenger invites you to have faith in your Lord? He has already taken a covenant from you—if you are believers.
057|009|It is He who reveals clear verses to His servant, leading you from darkness into light. Allah is Most Gentle and Most Merciful towards you.
057|010|What holds you back from contributing to Allah’s cause, when the entirety of the heavens and the Earth is His inheritance? None of you equals those who donated and fought before the conquest. Their rank is superior to those who gave and fought afterward. Nevertheless, Allah promises goodness to all. Allah is fully aware of your actions.
057|011|Who will give to Allah a generous loan, so He may multiply it for him manifold and grant him a noble reward?
057|012|On that Day, you will see the believing men and women, their light shining before them and on their right: “Today, rejoice in Gardens through which rivers flow, where you will reside eternally. That is the great success.”
057|013|On that Day, the hypocritical men and women will call out to the believers, “Wait for us, let us absorb some of your light.” However, they will be told, “Go back behind you and seek light.” Then a wall with a door will be erected between them. Inside it will be mercy, and on the outside of it will be suffering.
057|014|They will call out to them, “Were we not with you?” They will reply, “Yes, but you led yourselves into temptation. You hesitated, doubted, and your desires deluded you, until Allah’s decree came to pass. And the Deceiver deceived you about Allah.”
057|015|“Today, no ransom will be accepted from you or from those who disbelieved. Your dwelling is the Fire—it is most suited for you; a terrible destination.”
057|016|Isn’t it time yet for the believers’ hearts to become humble to Allah’s remembrance and the revealed truth? They shouldn’t be like those who were given the Scripture before, whose hearts hardened over time, and many of them are sinners.
057|017|Know that Allah revives the earth after its death. We’ve clearly explained Our revelations to you, so you may understand.
057|018|The charitable men and women who lend to Allah a good loan: it will be multiplied for them, and they will have a generous reward.
057|019|Those who believe in Allah and His messengers—they are the truthful and the witnesses before their Lord. They will have their reward and their light. But those who disbelieve and deny Our signs—they are the inhabitants of the Blaze.
057|020|Know that the life of this world is but play, diversion, glitter, boasting among you, and competition in increase of wealth and children—like rain whose resulting crop delights the unbelievers; then it withers, and you see it turning yellow; then it becomes scattered debris. There is severe punishment, forgiveness from Allah, and approval in the Hereafter. The life of this world is nothing more than a deceptive enjoyment.
057|021|Race toward forgiveness from your Lord, and a Paradise as vast as the heavens and the earth, prepared for those who believe in Allah and His messengers. This is Allah’s bounty, which He gives to whom He wills. Allah is the possessor of immense bounty.
057|022|Every calamity that strikes the earth or yourselves was recorded before We brought it into existence. This is easy for Allah.
057|023|So that you may not despair over what eludes you, nor rejoice over what He has given you. Allah doesn’t love the boastful or the arrogant.
057|024|Those who are reluctant to give and advise others to be the same; and whoever turns away—Allah is the Self-Sufficient, the Praiseworthy.
057|025|We sent Our messengers with clear signs, and We sent down with them the Scripture and the Balance, so that people may uphold justice. We also sent down iron, in which is a great strength and benefits for humankind, so that Allah may distinguish those who support Him and His messengers, although unseen. Allah is Powerful and Mighty.
057|026|We sent Noah and Abraham, and We established prophethood and Scripture among their descendants. Some of them were guided, yet many are sinners.
057|027|Then, following their footsteps, We sent Our messengers, and We sent Jesus, the son of Mary, and We gave him the Gospel. We instilled compassion and mercy into the hearts of his followers. They invented monasticism, which We had not prescribed for them—only seeking Allah’s approval, but they didn’t observe it with due observance. Therefore, We gave those among them who believed their reward, but many of them are sinners.
057|028|O you who believe, be conscious of Allah, and believe in His Messenger; He will give you a double share of His mercy, and He will make for you a light by which you walk, and forgive you. Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
057|029|The People of the Scripture should know that they have no monopoly whatsoever over Allah’s mercy and grace, and that all grace and mercy are in Allah’s hands. He grants them to whom He wills. Allah is the possessor of vast bounty.
058|001|Allah heard the plea of the woman who argued with you concerning her husband and brought her complaint to Allah. Allah listened to your conversation. Allah is All-Hearing, All-Seeing.
058|002|Among you, those who estrange their wives by equating them with their mothers—they aren’t their mothers. Their mothers are only those who gave birth to them. What they say is unacceptable and false. Nonetheless, Allah is Pardoning, Forgiving.
058|003|Those who estrange their wives by equating them with their mothers, then retract their statement, must free a captive before they may touch each other. This is what you are admonished by; and Allah is aware of your actions.
058|004|Whoever doesn’t find the means, he must fast for two consecutive months before they may touch each other. If he is unable, then he must feed sixty needy people. This is to affirm your faith in Allah and His Messenger. These are the limits Allah sets, and there is a severe punishment for the unbelievers.
058|005|Those who defy Allah and His Messenger will be subdued, just as those before them were subdued. We revealed clear verses, and for the unbelievers, there is a disgraceful punishment.
058|006|On the Day Allah resurrects them all, He will inform them of their deeds. Allah kept a record of it, even though they forgot it. Allah is a witness to all things.
058|007|Are you not aware that Allah knows everything in the heavens and on earth? No three people converse in secret, but He is their fourth, nor among five, but He is their sixth. Regardless of their number, He is with them wherever they may be. Then, on Resurrection Day, He will inform them of what they did. Allah is fully aware of everything.
058|008|Didn’t you see those who were forbidden from secret gatherings, yet they persist in what they were prohibited from, and they conspire in sin, aggression, and disobedience to the Messenger? When they come to you, they greet you in a way Allah didn’t greet you, and they say within themselves, “Why doesn’t Allah punish us for what we say?” Enough for them is Hell; they will roast in it. What a terrible destination!
058|009|O you who believe, when you converse privately, don’t converse in sin, hostility, and disobedience to the Messenger. Instead, converse in righteousness and piety, and fear Allah, to whom you will be gathered.
058|010|Secret counsels are of Satan, to sadden the believers. Yet, he can’t harm them at all except with Allah’s permission. So, let the believers put their trust in Allah.
058|011|O you who believe, when it is said to you, “Make room in assemblies”, then do so. Allah will make room for you. And when asked to disperse, then do so. Allah elevates in rank those of you who believe and those who are given knowledge. Allah is fully aware of what you do.
058|012|O you who believe, when you wish to have a private conversation with the Messenger, precede your private consultation with a charity. This is better and purer for you. However, if you lack the means, Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
058|013|Are you reluctant to offer charity before your consultation? Since you could not, Allah has forgiven you. So, establish prayer, give the purifying charity, and obey Allah and His Messenger. Allah is fully aware of what you do.
058|014|Did you consider those who befriended a people with whom Allah is angered? They are neither from you nor from them, and they swear falsely while they know.
058|015|Allah prepared for them a severe punishment. How evil is what they used to do!
058|016|They’ve made their oaths a disguise, and they obstruct others from Allah’s way. A humiliating punishment awaits them.
058|017|Their wealth and children won’t avail them against Allah. They are the inhabitants of the Fire, dwelling there for eternity.
058|018|On the Day when Allah will resurrect them all, they will swear to Him as they swear to you, and they think they are upon something. Indeed, they are the liars.
058|019|Satan has gained mastery over them and made them forget the remembrance of Allah. These are the partisans of Satan. Indeed, the partisans of Satan are the losers.
058|020|Those who oppose Allah and His Messenger will be among the most humiliated.
058|021|Allah has decreed, “I will surely overcome, I and My messengers.” Indeed, Allah is Strong, Mighty.
058|022|You won’t find people who believe in Allah and the Last Day befriending those who oppose Allah and His Messenger, even if they are their parents, children, siblings, or kin. In their hearts Allah has imprinted faith and strengthened them with a spirit from Him. He will admit them into Gardens beneath which rivers flow, where they will dwell forever. Allah is pleased with them, and they are pleased with Him. These are the Party of Allah. Surely, the Party of Allah will be the victors.
059|001|Everything in the heavens and on earth praises Allah, the Almighty, the All-Wise.
059|002|It is He who expelled the disbelieving People of the Scripture from their homes during the first gathering. You didn’t anticipate their departure, and they assumed their strongholds would protect them from Allah. However, Allah came upon them from where they didn’t expect, striking fear into their hearts. They demolished their homes with their own hands and the believer’s hands. Therefore, take a lesson, O people of understanding.
059|003|Had Allah not decreed their banishment, He would’ve punished them in this world. And in the Hereafter, they will face the torment of the Fire.
059|004|That is because they opposed Allah and His Messenger. Whoever opposes Allah—Allah is severe in penalty.
059|005|What you cut down of the trees or left standing on their trunks, it was with Allah’s permission, to disgrace the wicked.
059|006|The gains that Allah granted His Messenger from them, without you having to mount on horses or camels, are because Allah gives His messengers authority over whomever He wills. Allah has power over all things.
059|007|The gains that Allah allocated to His Messenger from the town-dwellers are for Allah, the Messenger, the relatives, the orphans, the needy, and the person on the path—so it may not only circulate among the wealthy among you. Accept what the Messenger gives you, and refrain from what he forbids you. Fear Allah, for Allah is severe in retribution.
059|008|For the impoverished emigrants who were expelled from their homes and their properties, seeking favor from Allah and His approval, and supporting Allah and His Messenger—these are the truthful ones.
059|009|Those who had taken up residence and faith before them, love those who emigrated to them, and find no hesitation in their hearts in assisting them. They prioritize them over themselves, despite their own needs. Those who protect themselves from their own stinginess are the successful ones.
059|010|And those who came after them pray: “Our Lord, forgive us and our brethren who preceded us in faith, and leave no resentment in our hearts towards those who have believed. Our Lord, You are Most Kind, Most Merciful.”
059|011|Didn’t you see the hypocrites who say to their disbelieving brethren among the People of the Scripture, “If you are expelled, we will surely go out with you, and we will never obey anyone against you; and if you are fought, we will surely help you.” But Allah testifies that they are liars.
059|012|If they are expelled, they won’t go out with them; if they are attacked, they won’t help them. And even if they were to help them, they would turn their backs, then they wouldn’t be helped.
059|013|Their fear of you is more intense than their fear of Allah. This is because they are people who don’t comprehend.
059|014|They won’t fight you except from within fortified towns or behind walls. Their internal strife is intense. You may perceive them as united, but their hearts are fragmented. This is because they are people who lack understanding.
059|015|Like those before them, they experienced the evil consequences of their conduct, and an agonizing punishment awaits them.
059|016|Like the example of Satan, when he lures a person into disbelief. But when he disbelieves, he says, “I am innocent of you; I fear Allah, the Lord of the worlds.”
059|017|The end result for them is the Fire, where they will dwell forever. This is the recompense for those who do wrong.
059|018|O you who believe, be conscious of Allah, and let each soul consider what it has prepared for tomorrow. And fear Allah, for He knows everything you do.
059|019|And be not like those who forgot Allah, so He made them forget themselves. These are the sinners.
059|020|Not equal are the inhabitants of the Fire and the inhabitants of Paradise. The inhabitants of Paradise—they are the victorious.
059|021|If We had revealed this Quran upon a mountain, you would’ve seen it humbled, shattered from fear of Allah. We present these parables to people, so they may reflect.
059|022|He is Allah, besides whom there is no god, the Knower of the invisible and the visible. He is the Gracious, the Merciful.
059|023|He is Allah, other than whom there is no deity, the Sovereign, the Sacred, the Source of Peace, the Giver of Faith, the Overseer, the Mighty, the Compeller, the Majestic. Glory be to Allah, far beyond what they associate with Him.
059|024|He is Allah, the Creator, the Inventor, the Designer. To Him belong the most beautiful names. All that’s in the heavens and the earth declares His glory. He is the Almighty, the All-Wise.
060|001|O you who believe, don’t take as allies My enemies and yours, showing them affection, even though they have rejected the truth that has come to you. They expelled the Messenger and yourselves because you believe in Allah, your Lord. If you’ve set out to strive in My cause and to seek My approval, how can you secretly express affection to them? I know what you hide and what you reveal. Whoever among you does this has deviated from the right path.
060|002|If they gain dominance over you, they become your adversaries, extend their hands and tongues against you with evil, desiring that you renounce your faith.
060|003|On the Day of Resurrection, neither your relatives nor your offspring will benefit you. He will separate between you. And Allah sees your actions.
060|004|There has been a good example set for you by Abraham and those with him, when they said to their people, “We disassociate ourselves from you and from whatever you worship besides Allah. We renounce you. Enmity and hatred have surfaced between us and you, indefinitely, until you believe in Allah alone.” Except for Abraham’s promise to his father: “I will seek forgiveness for you, but I am powerless to protect you from Allah.” “Our Lord, in You we place our trust, and to You we turn in repentance, and to You is the destiny.
060|005|Our Lord, don’t make us trial for the unbelievers, and forgive us. You are the Mighty and Wise.”
060|006|In them, there is an excellent example for those who hope for Allah and the Last Day. But whoever turns away—Allah is the Self-Sufficient, the Praiseworthy.
060|007|Perhaps Allah will foster love between you and those you consider enemies. Allah is capable of everything, and Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
060|008|Allah doesn’t prohibit you from being kind and just towards those who don’t fight you because of religion or expel you from your homes. Allah loves those who act justly.
060|009|Allah only forbids you from those who fight you because of religion, expel you from your homes, or assist others in your expulsion. Whoever allies with them—these are the wrongdoers.
060|010|O you who believe, when believing women come to you as refugees, test them. Allah is best aware of their faith. If you ascertain that they are believers, don’t send them back to the unbelievers. They are not lawful for them, nor are they lawful for them. Reimburse them for what they had spent. There is no fault in you if you marry them, provided you give them their dowries. Don’t maintain the marital ties with the unbelieving women; demand what you spent, and let them demand what they spent. This is Allah’s decree. He judges between you. Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise.
060|011|If any of your wives leave you for the unbelievers, and you subsequently retaliate, then pay those whose wives have gone the equivalent of what they had spent. And be mindful of Allah, in whom you believe.
060|012|O Prophet, when believing women come to you, pledging allegiance to you, that they won’t associate anything with Allah, nor steal, nor commit adultery, nor kill their children, nor fabricate any falsehood, nor disobey you in what is right, then accept their pledge and ask forgiveness for them from Allah. Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
060|013|O you who believe, don’t befriend people with whom Allah has become angry. They have despaired of the Hereafter, just as the unbelievers have despaired of the occupants of the graves.
061|001|Everything in the heavens and on earth glorifies Allah, the Almighty, the All-Wise.
061|002|O you who believe, why do you say what you don’t do?
061|003|It is greatly displeasing to Allah that you say what you don’t do.
061|004|Allah loves those who fight in His cause, in formation, as if they were a solid structure.
061|005|When Moses said to his people, “O my people, why do you harm me, when you know that I am Allah’s Messenger to you?” When they swerved, Allah swerved their hearts. Allah does not guide the immoral people.
061|006|When Jesus, the son of Mary, said, “O Children of Israel, I am Allah’s Messenger to you, confirming the Torah that preceded me, and announcing a Messenger to come after me, his name will be Ahmad.” However, when he brought them the evident miracles, they said, “This is obvious magic.”
061|007|Who is more unjust than someone who fabricates lies about Allah while being invited to Submission? Allah doesn’t guide the wrongdoing people.
061|008|They wish to extinguish Allah’s light with their words, but Allah insists on completing His light, despite the hatred of the unbelievers.
061|009|It is He who sent His Messenger with the guidance and the religion of truth, to make it prevail over all other religions, despite the associators’ hatred.
061|010|O you who believe, shall I introduce you to a trade that will save you from much suffering?
061|011|Believe in Allah and His Messenger, and strive in Allah’s way with your wealth and your lives. That is better for you, if you only knew.
061|012|He will forgive your sins and admit you into Gardens beneath which rivers flow, and into fine dwellings in the Gardens of Eternity. That’s the ultimate success.
061|013|And another thing you love: victory from Allah and an imminent conquest. So, give the believers good news.
061|014|O you who believe, be supporters of Allah, as Jesus, son of Mary, said to the disciples, “Who are my supporters towards Allah?” The disciples replied, “We are the supporters of Allah.” Then a faction among the Children of Israel believed, while another faction disbelieved. So, We supported those who believed against their enemy, and they became dominant.
062|001|Everything in the heavens and on Earth praises Allah—the Supreme Sovereign, the Sacred, the Almighty, the All-Wise.
062|002|It is He who raised, amidst the illiterate, a messenger from their own, conveying to them His verses, purifying them, and teaching them the Scripture and wisdom. Before this, they were in clear misguidance.
062|003|And others of them who haven’t yet joined them. He is the Almighty, the Wise.
062|004|That is the grace of Allah, which He grants to whom He wills. Allah is the possessor of immense bounty.
062|005|The example of those entrusted with the Torah, yet failed to uphold it, is like that of a donkey carrying heavy books. Pitiful is the example of the people who deny Allah’s revelations. Allah does not guide wrongdoing people.
062|006|Say, “O you who are Jewish, if you claim to be the chosen allies of Allah, excluding all other people, then wish for death, if you are truthful.”
062|007|However, they will never wish for it, because of what their hands have done. Allah is fully aware of the wrongdoers.
062|008|Say, “The death from which you flee will meet you. Then you will be returned to the Knower of the unseen and the seen, and He will inform you of what you used to do.”
062|009|O you who believe, when the call to prayer is made on Friday, hurry to the remembrance of Allah, and leave off business. That’s better for you, if only you knew.
062|010|When the prayer is concluded, disperse in the land, seek Allah’s bounty, and remember Allah frequently, so you may succeed.
062|011|Yet when they see some trade or entertainment, they scatter towards it and leave you standing. Say, “What’s with Allah is better than any amusement or trade, and Allah is the Best of Providers.”
063|001|When the hypocrites come to you, they say, “We testify that you are Allah’s Messenger.” Yet, Allah knows that you are His Messenger, and Allah testifies that the hypocrites are liars.
063|002|They use their oaths as a shield, hindering others from Allah’s path. Their deeds are indeed deplorable.
063|003|This is because they believed, then disbelieved, so their hearts were sealed and they don’t understand.
063|004|When you see them, their physical appearances impress you, and when they speak, you listen to their words. They are like propped-up hollow timber. They think every shout is against them; they are the enemy, so beware of them. May Allah combat them! How deluded they are!
063|005|When they are told, “Come, let the Messenger of Allah seek forgiveness for you,” they turn their heads in disdain, and you see them turning away, while they are arrogant.
063|006|Whether you pray for their forgiveness or not, Allah won’t forgive them. Allah doesn’t guide the rebellious people.
063|007|They say, “Don’t spend on those who are with Allah’s Messenger, until they disband.” To Allah belong the treasures of the heavens and the earth, but the hypocrites can’t comprehend.
063|008|They say, “Once we return to the City, the more honorable will expel the more humble.” However, all honor and power belong to Allah, His Messenger, and the believers, but the hypocrites don’t know.
063|009|O you who believe, don’t let your wealth and children distract you from the remembrance of Allah. Those who do are the losers.
063|010|Spend from what We provide for you before death comes to one of you, and he says, “My Lord, if only You would delay me for a short while, so that I could give charity and be one of the righteous.”
063|011|But never will Allah delay a soul when its appointed time has come. Allah is informed of everything you do.
064|001|Everything in the heavens and the earth glorifies Allah. Sovereignty is His, and to Him praise is due, and He is capable of all things.
064|002|It is He who created you; among you are disbelievers, and among you are believers. Allah sees all that you do.
064|003|He created the heavens and the earth with truth. And He designed you, and He perfected your shapes. To Him is the final return.
064|004|He knows everything in the heavens and the earth, and He knows what you conceal and declare. And Allah knows what’s in the hearts.
064|005|Didn’t the stories of those who disbelieved before you reach you? They tasted the affliction of their actions; for them awaits a painful punishment.
064|006|This is because their messengers came to them with clear signs, but they said, “Are humans to guide us?” So, they disbelieved and turned away. Yet Allah is Self-Sufficient, Worthy of all praise.
064|007|Those who disbelieve claim, “they won’t be resurrected”. Say, “Yes, by my Lord, you will surely be resurrected, then you will be informed of what you did—and that is easy for Allah.”
064|008|So believe in Allah, His Messenger, and the light We revealed. Allah is fully aware of what you do.
064|009|The Day He gathers you for the Day of Assembly—that is the Day of loss and gain. Whoever believes in Allah and performs righteous deeds, He will absolve him of his sins and admit him into Gardens through which rivers flow, to abide therein eternally. That’s the supreme victory.
064|010|However, those who disbelieve and deny Our signs will be the inhabitants of the Fire, to remain therein forever. And what a wretched destination!
064|011|No disaster strikes except by Allah’s permission. Whoever believes in Allah, He will guide his heart. Allah is aware of everything.
064|012|So obey Allah and obey the Messenger. But if you turn away, Our Messenger is only responsible for clear delivery.
064|013|Allah—there is no deity except Him. In Allah should the believers place their trust.
064|014|O you who believe, among your spouses and your children, there are adversaries to you, so beware of them. And if you pardon, overlook, and forgive, then Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
064|015|Your wealth and your children are a test, and with Allah is a great reward.
064|016|Be conscious of Allah as much as you are capable, and listen, and obey, and give for your own good. Whoever is protected from the greed of his own soul—these are the successful.
064|017|If you lend to Allah a good loan, He will multiply it for you and forgive you. Allah is Appreciative and Forbearing.
064|018|He is the Knower of the unseen and the seen, the Mighty and Wise.
065|001|O Prophet, when you divorce women, divorce them at their prescribed periods, and count their waiting period accurately. Be conscious of Allah, your Lord. Don’t expel them from their homes, nor should they leave, unless they have committed a clearly immoral conduct. These are the limits set by Allah. Whoever oversteps Allah’s limits wrongs his soul. You don’t know; perhaps Allah will thereafter bring about a new situation.
065|002|When they have reached their term, either retain them kindly or separate from them amicably. Call upon two trustworthy witnesses from among you, and establish truthful testimony for Allah. This counsels whoever believes in Allah and the Last Day. Whoever fears Allah, He will make a way out for him.
065|003|He will provide for him from where he doesn’t expect. Whoever puts his trust in Allah—He will be enough for him. Allah will accomplish His purpose. Allah has set a measure for all things.
065|004|As for your women who have passed menopause, if you are in doubt, their waiting period shall be three months, as well as for those who haven’t menstruated yet. As for those who are pregnant, their term lasts until they have given birth. Whoever fears Allah: He will make his affairs easy.
065|005|This is Allah’s commandment, which He revealed to you. Whoever fears Allah, He will erase his sins and magnify his reward.
065|006|Provide them residence where you reside, according to your means, and don’t harass them to make their lives difficult. If they’re pregnant, provide for them until they give birth. If they nurse for you, compensate them and maintain a cordial relationship. If you disagree, then another woman may nurse for him.
065|007|The wealthy should spend according to his means, and the one with limited resources should spend from what Allah has given him. Allah doesn’t burden a soul beyond what He has given it. Allah will bring about, after hardship, ease.
065|008|Many cities rebelled against the command of their Lord and His messengers, so We held them strictly accountable and severely punished them.
065|009|So they tasted the outcome of their deeds, and the result of their deeds was loss.
065|010|Allah has prepared for them a severe punishment. So beware of Allah, O you of understanding who have believed. Allah has sent down to you a reminder.
065|011|A messenger who delivers to you Allah’s clear verses, to bring out those who believe and do righteous deeds from darkness into light. Whoever believes in Allah and acts righteously, He will admit him into Gardens through which rivers flow, to live there forever. Allah has prepared for him an excellent provision.
065|012|It is Allah who created seven heavens and; and of the earth, the like of them. The command descends throughout them, so you may know that Allah has power over all things and that Allah encompasses all things in knowledge.
066|001|O Prophet, why do you prohibit what Allah has made lawful for you, seeking the approval of your wives? And Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.
066|002|Allah has already ordained for you the dissolution of your oaths. And Allah is your protector, He is the All-Knowing, All-Wise.
066|003|When the Prophet disclosed a matter in confidence to one of his wives, but when she disclosed it, and Allah made it known to him, he shared some of it and avoided part. Then, when he told her about it, she said, “Who informed you of this?” He said, “The All-Knowing, the All-Aware informed me.”
066|004|If you two repent to Allah, then your hearts have inclined. But if you cooperate against him—then Allah is his protector, and Gabriel and the righteous believers and the angels, moreover, are his helpers.
066|005|It may be if he divorced you, that his Lord will give him instead of you, wives better than you: submissive, faithful, obedient, penitent, worshippers, fasters, previously married and virgins.
066|006|O you who believe, protect yourselves and your families from a Fire whose fuel is people and stones, over which are angels, harsh and severe; they don’t disobey Allah in what He commands them, but they do what they are commanded.
066|007|O you who have disbelieved, make no excuses today. You are only being recompensed for what you used to do.
066|008|O you who have believed, repent to Allah with sincere repentance. Perhaps your Lord will remit your sins and admit you into Gardens through which rivers flow. On that Day, Allah won’t disappoint the Prophet and those who believed with him. Their light will proceed before them, and on their right, they will say, “Our Lord, perfect our light for us and forgive us. You are over all things competent.”
066|009|O Prophet, strive against the unbelievers and the hypocrites, and be harsh with them. Their abode is Hell, and wretched is the destination.
066|010|Allah presents an example for those who disbelieve: the wife of Noah and the wife of Lot. They were under two of our righteous servants, but they betrayed them, so they didn’t avail them from Allah at all, and it was said, “Enter the Fire with those who enter.”
066|011|And Allah presents an example for those who believe: the wife of Pharaoh, when she said, “My Lord, build for me near You a house in Paradise, save me from Pharaoh and his actions, and save me from the wrongdoing people.”
066|012|And Mary, the daughter of Imran, who guarded her chastity, so We breathed into her of Our Spirit. And she believed in the words of her Lord and His scriptures, and she was devoutly obedient.
067|001|Blessed is He in whose hand lies the dominion, and He is over all things competent.
067|002|He who created life and death to test which of you is best in conduct. And He is the Exalted in Might, the Forgiving.
067|003|He who created seven heavens in layers. You will see no discrepancy in the creation of the Merciful. Look again: do you see any flaws?
067|004|Look again, and yet again, and your sight will return to you dazzled and fatigued.
067|005|We adorned the lowest heaven with lamps, and We made them projectiles to drive away the devils. We prepared for them the torment of the Blaze.
067|006|For those who deny their Lord, the punishment of Hell awaits—a terrible destination.
067|007|When they are thrown into it, they will hear it gasping as it boils over.
067|008|It almost bursts with rage. Every time a batch is hurled into it, its keepers will ask them, “Did no Warner come to you?”
067|009|They will answer, “Yes, a warner did come to us, but we denied and said, ‘Allah didn’t reveal anything; you are greatly mistaken.’”
067|010|And they will say, “If only we had listened or used reason, we wouldn’t be among the inhabitants of the Fiery Blaze.”
067|011|They confessed their sin. So, away with the dwellers of the Blaze.
067|012|For those who fear their Lord unseen, for them is forgiveness and a grand reward.
067|013|Whether you conceal your words or declare them, He knows the secrets of the hearts.
067|014|Wouldn’t He know, He who created? He is the Kind, the Expert.
067|015|It is He who made the earth manageable for you. So traverse its tracks and eat from His provision. To Him is the resurgence.
067|016|Are you certain that the One in the heavens won’t cause the earth to swallow you as it shakes?
067|017|Are you sure that the One in the heavens won’t send upon you a violent wind? Then you will know how My warning was.
067|018|Those before them also denied. So, how was My condemnation?
067|019|Don’t they see the birds above them, spreading and folding their wings? None holds them up except the Merciful. He is watchful over all things.
067|020|Who could be an army to aid you, other than the Most Merciful? The unbelievers are in nothing but delusion.
067|021|Who will sustain you if He withholds His provision? Yet, they persist in defiance and aversion.
067|022|Who is better guided: the one who walks face down, or the one who walks upright on a straight path?
067|023|Say, “It is He who created you and endowed you with hearing, sight, and hearts. Yet, little do you give thanks.”
067|024|Say, “It is He who multiplied you throughout the earth, and to Him, you will be gathered.”
067|025|They ask, “When will this promise be fulfilled, if you are truthful?”
067|026|Respond, “Its knowledge lies only with Allah, and I am but a clear warner.”
067|027|When they see it approaching, the faces of those who disbelieved will be gloomy, and it will be said, “This is what you were calling for.”
067|028|Say, “Consider this: whether Allah destroys me and those with me, or He showers us with His mercy, who can protect the unbelievers from a severe punishment?”
067|029|Say, “He is the Most Merciful. We have believed in Him, and upon Him, we rely. Soon, you will realize who is in glaring error.”
067|030|Say, “Consider this: if your water were to sink, who could supply you with fresh, flowing water?”
068|001|Nuun. By the Pen and all that they inscribe.
068|002|You are not, by the grace of your Lord, insane.
068|003|You will receive an unending reward.
068|004|And you possess a very noble character.
068|005|You will see, and they will see.
068|006|Which of you is the afflicted.
068|007|Your Lord knows best who strays from His path, and He knows best who is guided.
068|008|So, don’t yield to the deniers.
068|009|They wish you would compromise so they, too, could compromise.
068|010|And don’t obey any despicable oath-monger.
068|011|A defamer, a spreader of slander.
068|012|An obstructor of good, a transgressor, a sinner.
068|013|Rude and fake.
068|014|Just because he is wealthy and has children.
068|015|When Our verses are conveyed to him, he says, “Legends of the ancients.”
068|016|We will mark him on the nose.
068|017|We tested them, just as We tested the garden owners, when they vowed to harvest in the morning.
068|018|And they didn’t make an exception.
068|019|But a visitation from your Lord swept around it while they were asleep.
068|020|And by morning, it was as if harvested.
068|021|At dawn, they called one another.
068|022|“Go early to your crop if you intend to harvest.”
068|023|And they set off, whispering amongst themselves.
068|024|“Make sure no poor person enters your garden today.”
068|025|And they left early, firm in their resolve.
068|026|But when they saw it, they said, “We must have strayed!
068|027|We are deprived!”
068|028|The most prudent among them said, “Didn’t I tell you to offer praise?”
068|029|They replied, “Glory be to our Lord! Indeed, we were wrongdoers.”
068|030|Then they turned to one another, blaming each other.
068|031|They lamented, “Woe to us! We were domineering.
068|032|Our Lord may give us a better substitute. We turn to our Lord in hope.”
068|033|Such is the suffering, yet the suffering of the Hereafter is greater, if they only knew.
068|034|For the righteous with their Lord are the Gardens of Delight.
068|035|Should We treat the submitters like the criminals?
068|036|What’s the matter with you? How do you judge?
068|037|Or do you have a book in which you study?
068|038|In it, you have whatever you prefer?
068|039|Or do you have guarantees from Us, reaching until Resurrection Day, that you will get whatever you judge?
068|040|Ask them, which of them can guarantee that.
068|041|Or do they have partners? Then let them bring their partners, if they are truthful.
068|042|On the Day the reality will be exposed, they will be called upon to prostrate, but they won’t be able to.
068|043|Their eyes will be downcast, covered by disgrace; for they were called upon to prostrate when they were sound.
068|044|So leave Me to those who deny this message. We will progressively lead them from where they don’t perceive.
068|045|And I will give them time. My plan is firm.
068|046|Or are you asking them for a fee, therefore they are burdened with debts?
068|047|Or do they have knowledge of the unseen, so they write it down?
068|048|Exercise patience for your Lord’s decree, and don’t be like the Fellow of the Whale, who called out in his affliction.
068|049|Had it not been for a favor from his Lord, he would’ve been thrown onto the barren shore, and he was to blame.
068|050|But his Lord chose him and made him of the righteous.
068|051|Upon hearing the message, the unbelievers nearly pierce you with their glances and say, “He is surely crazy!”
068|052|But it is nothing but a reminder to the world.
069|001|The Inevitable Reality.
069|002|What is the Inevitable Reality?
069|003|And what will make you realize what the Inevitable Reality is?
069|004|Thamud and Aad denied the Striking Calamity.
069|005|As for Thamud, they were destroyed by the Overwhelming.
069|006|As for Aad, they were destroyed by a relentless, roaring wind.
069|007|He imposed it upon them for seven nights and eight consecutive days. You would see the people lying overthrown, as if they were hollow trunks of palm trees.
069|008|Can you see any remnants of them?
069|009|Then came Pharaoh, those before him, and the Overturned Cities, all steeped in sin.
069|010|They all disobeyed their Lord’s messenger, and consequently, He seized them with a devastating seizure.
069|011|When the waters surged, We carried you in the Cruiser.
069|012|That We might make it a lesson for you, and for heedful ears to retain.
069|013|Then, when the Trumpet is blown, with a single blast.
069|014|And the earth and the mountains are lifted and crushed with a single strike.
069|015|Then on that Day, the Great Event will happen.
069|016|And the sky will split apart; on that Day, it will be unstable.
069|017|And the angels will be on its sides, and that Day eight will bear the Throne of your Lord above them.
069|018|On that Day, you will be exposed, not a single secret of yours will be hidden.
069|019|As for he who is given his record in his right hand, he will say, “Here, take my record and read it.
069|020|I knew that I would meet my account.”
069|021|So, he will be in a life of contentment.
069|022|In a high Garden.
069|023|Its fruit hanging within reach.
069|024|“Eat and drink cheerfully for what you did in the days gone by.”
069|025|But as for him who is given his record in his left hand, he will say, “I wish I had not been given my record.
069|026|And was not aware of my account.
069|027|I wish it had been the decisive one!
069|028|My wealth didn’t avail me.
069|029|My authority has vanished.”
069|030|“Seize him, then shackle him.
069|031|Then into Hellfire drive him.
069|032|Then fasten him with a chain seventy cubits long.
069|033|He used not to believe in Allah the Magnificent.
069|034|Nor did he urge the feeding of the poor.
069|035|So he has no friend here today.
069|036|And no food except from the wash of wounds.
069|037|None but wrongdoers eat of it.”
069|038|So I swear by what you see.
069|039|And by what you don’t see.
069|040|It is the speech of a respectable Messenger.
069|041|And it is not the speech of a poet—little do you believe.
069|042|Nor the word of a soothsayer—little do you remember.
069|043|A revelation from the Lord of the universes.
069|044|Had he attributed some statements to Us.
069|045|We would’ve seized him by the right hand.
069|046|Followed by cutting off his Lifeline.
069|047|And none of you could’ve shielded him from Us.
069|048|It’s a reminder for the righteous.
069|049|We know that some of you will deny it.
069|050|It’s a source of regret for the unbelievers.
069|051|Yet, it’s the absolute reality.
069|052|So, glorify the name of your Lord, the Most Magnificent.
070|001|A questioner asked for a punishment bound to happen.
070|002|For the unbelievers, there is none to avert it.
070|003|From Allah, the Lord of the ascending pathways.
070|004|The angels and the Spirit ascend unto Him, on a Day that spans fifty thousand years.
070|005|So, be patient with a beautiful patience.
070|006|They perceive it as far off.
070|007|But We see it as near.
070|008|On that Day, the sky will resemble molten copper.
070|009|And the mountains will appear like tufts of wool.
070|010|No friend will ask of a friend.
070|011|Although they will be shown to each other, the criminal would wish to ransom himself from the punishment of that Day by offering his children.
070|012|And his girlfriend and his brother.
070|013|And his family that sheltered him.
070|014|And all the people on earth, if it would only save him.
070|015|No indeed! It is a blazing flame.
070|016|Stripping away the scalps.
070|017|Calling those who turned their backs and fled.
070|018|And hoarded and stored away.
070|019|Man was created anxious.
070|020|Agitated when misfortune touches him.
070|021|And tight-fisted when good reaches him.
070|022|Except for those who pray.
070|023|Who remain constant in their prayers.
070|024|And in whose wealth is a known right.
070|025|For the asker and the deprived.
070|026|And those who affirm the Day of Judgment.
070|027|And those who fear their Lord’s punishment.
070|028|Their Lord’s punishment isn’t to be underestimated.
070|029|And those who guard their purity.
070|030|Except for their spouses and those they rightfully possess, for then they are not to be blamed.
070|031|But those who seek anything beyond that are the trespassers.
070|032|And those who keep to their trusts and promises.
070|033|And those who stand by their testimonies.
070|034|And those who are diligent in their prayers.
070|035|These will be in Gardens, honored.
070|036|So, why do these unbelievers rush headlong towards you, from every direction?
070|037|From the right and from the left, in droves?
070|038|Does each one of them aspire to be admitted into a Garden of Bliss?
070|039|No indeed! We created them from what they know.
070|040|By the Lord of the sunrises and the sunsets, We are Able.
070|041|To replace them with others better than them. We are not overtaken.
070|042|So, let them indulge and play until they encounter their promised Day.
070|043|The Day they will rush out from the graves, as if they were racing towards a goal post.
070|044|Their eyes will be humbled, humiliation will overshadow them. This is the Day they were promised.
071|001|We sent Noah to his people: “Warn your people, before a severe punishment comes to them.”
071|002|He said, “O my people, I am a clear warner to you.
071|003|Worship Allah, fear Him, and obey me.
071|004|He will forgive your sins and delay you to a specified term. When Allah’s appointed time arrives, it can’t be deferred—if only you could understand.”
071|005|He implored, “My Lord, I called out to my people night and day.
071|006|But my call only increased their flight away.
071|007|Whenever I urged them to seek Your forgiveness, they would stick their fingers in their ears, cover themselves with their garments, persist in their stubbornness, and grow increasingly arrogant.
071|008|I called out to them openly.
071|009|And I appealed to them publicly, and I spoke with them privately.
071|010|I said, ‘Seek forgiveness from your Lord, for He is Ever-Forgiving.
071|011|He will send down abundant rain upon you.
071|012|And provide you with wealth and children, and bless you with gardens, and grant you rivers.
071|013|What’s the matter with you, that you don’t attribute to Allah due grandeur.
071|014|When He created you in stages.
071|015|Don’t you see how Allah created seven heavens in perfect harmony?
071|016|And He made the moon a luminary in them, and He made the sun a glowing lamp.
071|017|And Allah germinated you from the earth like plants.
071|018|Then He will return you to it, and He will extract you once again.
071|019|And Allah made the earth a spread for you.
071|020|So you may move along its wide roads.’”
071|021|Noah said, “My Lord, they defied me, and they followed those whose wealth and children only amplify their loss.”
071|022|They devised a formidable plan.
071|023|They said, “Never abandon your gods. Never abandon Wadd, nor Suwa, nor Yaghoos, nor Yaooq, nor Nassr.
071|024|They misled many. So, increase the wrongdoers in nothing but straying.”
071|025|Because of their sins, they were drowned and entered into fire, finding no allies to defend them against Allah.
071|026|Noah prayed, “O my Lord, don’t leave a single disbeliever on earth.
071|027|If You allow them to remain, they will mislead Your devotees, and they will give birth to nothing but sinful unbelievers.
071|028|My Lord, forgive me, my parents, and whoever enters my home as a believer, and all believing men and women, but increase the wrongdoers in nothing but ruin.”
072|001|Say, “It was revealed to me that a band of jinn listened, then declared, ‘We heard an amazing Quran.
072|002|It guides towards righteousness, so we have believed in it, and we won’t associate anyone with our Lord.
072|003|And exalted is the majesty of our Lord; He has not taken a female friend, nor a son.
072|004|Yet, the foolish among us have spoken nonsense about Allah.
072|005|We had thought that mankind and the jinn would never utter lies against Allah.
072|006|Certain humans used to seek help from the men of the jinn, which only exacerbated their fear and fatigue.
072|007|And they had presumed, as you presumed, that Allah would not resurrect anyone.
072|008|We probed the heavens and found them with stern guards and flaming meteors.
072|009|We used to occupy places there to eavesdrop. But now, whoever attempts to listen finds a blazing meteor lying in wait for him.
072|010|And we don’t know whether ill is intended for those on earth, or whether their Lord intends for them a right path.
072|011|Among us are the righteous, and among us are less than that; we follow diverse paths.
072|012|And we’ve realized that we can’t defeat Allah on earth, and that we can’t escape Him by flight.
072|013|Upon hearing the guidance, we believed in it. Whoever believes in his Lord fears neither loss nor oppression.
072|014|Among us are the submitters, and among us are the deviants. Those who submit have found the path of righteousness.
072|015|As for the deviants, they will be fuel for Hellfire.”
072|016|Had they remained on the path, We would have provided them with abundant water to drink.
072|017|To test them thereby. Whoever turns away from his Lord’s remembrance, He will subject him to escalating suffering.
072|018|The places of worship are for Allah. Don’t call upon anyone else alongside Allah.
072|019|When Allah’s servant stood up, calling upon Him, they nearly mobbed him in aggression.
072|020|Say, “I only pray to my Lord, and I associate none with Him.”
072|021|Say, “I hold no power over harm or righteousness for you.”
072|022|Say, “No one can protect me from Allah, nor can I find refuge apart from Him.
072|023|My only duty is to convey Allah’s revelations. Whoever disobeys Allah and His Messenger will reside eternally in the blistering flames of Hell.”
072|024|Until, when they see what they were promised, they will realize who was weaker in helpers and lesser in number.
072|025|Say, “I don’t know whether what you’ve been promised is near, or if my Lord has set a distant time for it.”
072|026|He is the Knower of the unseen, and He doesn’t disclose His unseen to anyone.
072|027|Except a messenger whom He approves of, then He posts sentinels before him and behind him.
072|028|That He may ascertain that they delivered their Lord’s messages. He surrounds all that they have, and He keeps count of all things.
073|001|O you, Enwrapped.
073|002|Stand in prayer at night, except for a little.
073|003|Half of it, or subtract a little from it.
073|004|Or add to it, and recite the Quran with measured recitation.
073|005|We will send down to you a heavy word.
073|006|The night vigil is more effective, and more suitable for understanding.
073|007|You have during the day long engagements.
073|008|Invoke the name of your Lord, and dedicate yourself to Him wholeheartedly.
073|009|Lord of the east and the west, there is no deity except Him, so take Him as Trustee.
073|010|And bear patiently what they say, and leave them in a dignified manner.
073|011|And leave Me and the deniers, the possessors of ease and comfort; and respite them for a while.
073|012|We prepared chains, and a blazing fire.
073|013|And food that gags, and a torment most painful.
073|014|The Day the earth and the mountains will quake, and the mountains will become like shifting mounds of sand.
073|015|We have sent to you a Messenger, a witness over you, just as We sent a Messenger to Pharaoh.
073|016|But Pharaoh defied the Messenger, so We seized him with a devastating grip.
073|017|If you persist in disbelief, how will you guard yourselves on a Day that will turn children’s hair white?
073|018|The heavens will crack from it. His promise is always fulfilled.
073|019|This is a reminder, so whoever wills may take a path toward his Lord.
073|020|Your Lord knows that you stand for nearly two-thirds of the night, or half of it, or a third of it, and so do a party of those who are with you. Allah regulates the night and the day. He knew that you wouldn’t be able to do it, so He relented towards you. Read what’s easy from the Quran. He knows that some of you may be ill, others traveling through the land seeking Allah’s bounty, and others fighting in Allah’s cause. So read what’s easy from it. Establish prayer, give the purifying charity, and lend Allah a good loan. Whatever good you forward for yourselves, you’ll find it with Allah, better and more significant in reward. And seek forgiveness from Allah; Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
074|001|O you, Cloaked.
074|002|Arise and warn.
074|003|And magnify your Lord.
074|004|And purify your garments.
074|005|And shun uncleanliness.
074|006|Don’t bestow favors to acquire more.
074|007|And for your Lord’s sake, be patient.
074|008|When the Trumpet is blown.
074|009|That Day will be a difficult day.
074|010|Not easy for the disbelievers.
074|011|Leave Me to deal with the one I created alone.
074|012|And gave him vast wealth.
074|013|And children as witnesses.
074|014|And I eased his circumstances.
074|015|Then he hopes that I will add more.
074|016|Indeed, no! He was stubborn towards Our revelations.
074|017|I will impose on him a steep uphill climb.
074|018|He thought and decided.
074|019|May he be destroyed, how he decided!
074|020|Then may he be destroyed, how he decided!
074|021|Then he looked.
074|022|Then he frowned and grimaced.
074|023|Then he turned his back and swelled with pride.
074|024|He said, “This is nothing but magic inherited from antiquity.
074|025|This is nothing but the word of a human.”
074|026|I will thrust him into Saqar.
074|027|But what will make you understand what Saqar is?
074|028|It spares nothing, and it leaves nothing.
074|029|It blisters the skins.
074|030|Over it are nineteen.
074|031|We appointed angels as wardens of the Fire, and We set their number as a trial for the unbelievers, to reassure those who were given the Scripture, to strengthen the faith of the believers, and to remove any doubts from those who were given the Scripture and the believers. Those whose hearts harbor disease and the unbelievers will ask, “What does Allah intend by this parable?” Thus, Allah misguides whom He wills and guides whom He wills. None knows the soldiers of your Lord except Him. It is nothing but a reminder for humans.
074|032|Absolutely! By the moon.
074|033|And by the night, as it recedes.
074|034|And by the dawn, as it breathes.
074|035|It is one of the greatest.
074|036|A warning to humans.
074|037|For whoever among you wishes to advance or lag behind.
074|038|Every soul is held hostage by its deeds.
074|039|Except those on the Right.
074|040|In Gardens, they are asking one another.
074|041|About the criminals.
074|042|“What led you to Saqar?”
074|043|They will reply, “We weren’t among those who prayed.
074|044|Nor did we feed the needy.
074|045|And we used to indulge with those who indulged.
074|046|And we used to deny the Day of Recompense.
074|047|Until certainty came upon us.”
074|048|The intercession of the intercessors won’t benefit them.
074|049|So, why are they turning away from the Reminder?
074|050|As if they were startled donkeys.
074|051|Fleeing from a lion.
074|052|Does each one of them wish to be handed out widespread pages?
074|053|Indeed, they don’t fear the Hereafter.
074|054|Surely, it’s a reminder.
074|055|So whoever wills may remember it.
074|056|But they won’t remember, unless Allah so wills. He is the source of righteousness, and the source of forgiveness.
075|001|I do swear by the Day of Resurrection.
075|002|And I do swear by the blaming soul.
075|003|Does man think that We won’t assemble his bones?
075|004|Indeed, We are able to reconstitute his fingertips.
075|005|Yet, man desires to persist in his sinful ways.
075|006|He questions, “When is Resurrection Day?”
075|007|But when the sight is dazed.
075|008|And the moon is eclipsed.
075|009|And the sun and the moon are merged.
075|010|On that Day, man will ask, “Where is the escape?”
075|011|No, there is no refuge.
075|012|To your Lord, on that Day, will be the settlement.
075|013|On that Day, man will be informed of everything he put forward, and everything he left behind.
075|014|Yet man will be a witness against himself.
075|015|Even as he presents his excuses.
075|016|Don’t move your tongue hastily with it to recite it.
075|017|Then it’s upon Us to compile it and recite it.
075|018|And when We’ve recited it, follow its recitation.
075|019|Then upon Us is its explanation.
075|020|Yet, you love the fleeting life.
075|021|And neglect the Hereafter.
075|022|Faces on that Day will be radiant.
075|023|Looking towards their Lord.
075|024|And, on that Day, faces will be gloomy.
075|025|Dreading a looming catastrophe.
075|026|When it has reached the collarbones.
075|027|And it will be asked, ‘Is there a healer?’
075|028|Then comes the realization that it’s time to depart.
075|029|As one leg intertwines with the other.
075|030|On that Day, the voyage will be towards your Lord.
075|031|He neither believed nor prayed.
075|032|Instead, he denied and turned away.
075|033|Then he returned to his family, full of self-importance.
075|034|Woe to you, then woe!
075|035|Then, woe to you, and woe!
075|036|Does man think he will be left without purpose?
075|037|Wasn’t he a sperm-drop from emitted semen?
075|038|Then he became a clinging clot, and He created and formed?
075|039|And made from it the two sexes, male and female.
075|040|Isn’t He capable of giving life to the dead?
076|001|Was there not a time in history when man was nothing to be mentioned?
076|002|We created man from a drop of mingled fluid, to test him, and We endowed him with hearing and sight.
076|003|We guided him on the path, whether he be grateful or ungrateful.
076|004|For the unbelievers, We prepared chains, shackles, and a blazing inferno.
076|005|The righteous will drink from a cup whose mixture is camphor.
076|006|A spring from which the servants of Allah will drink, causing it to gush abundantly.
076|007|They fulfill their vows and dread a Day whose evil would be widespread.
076|008|They feed, for the love of Him, the destitute, the orphan, and the captive.
076|009|“We feed you only for the sake of Allah; we desire neither compensation nor thanks from you.
076|010|We fear from our Lord a frowning, grim Day.”
076|011|So, Allah will protect them from the woes of that Day and grant them radiance and happiness.
076|012|And He will reward them, for being patient, with a garden and silk.
076|013|Reclining therein on adorned couches, they will see there neither the excessive heat of the sun, nor severe cold.
076|014|Its shade hovering over them, with its fruit clusters hanging low.
076|015|They will be served from vessels of silver and crystal-clear cups.
076|016|Cups of silver, they measure them precisely.
076|017|They will be given to drink a drink mixed with ginger.
076|018|From a spring therein named Salsabil.
076|019|And there will circulate among them eternalized youths, when you see them, you would think they are scattered pearls.
076|020|When you look around, you will see delight and a vast kingdom.
076|021|Upon them will be garments of fine, green silk and heavy brocade, and they will be adorned with bracelets of silver. Their Lord will give them a pure drink.
076|022|“This is your reward. And your effort has been appreciated.”
076|023|It is We who revealed the Quran to you, gradually.
076|024|So be patient for your Lord’s judgment, and obey neither the sinner nor the ungrateful among them.
076|025|And remember the name of your Lord morning and evening.
076|026|And during part of the night, prostrate yourself to Him, and glorify Him long into the night.
076|027|These people love the fleeting life, and they leave behind a heavy day.
076|028|We created them and strengthened their frames, and when We will, We will replace them with others like them.
076|029|This is a reminder. So, whoever wills, let him take a way towards his Lord.
076|030|But you cannot will, unless Allah wills. Allah is ever Knowing and Wise.
076|031|He admits into His mercy whom He wills. But for the wrongdoers, He prepared a severe punishment.
077|001|By those dispatched in succession.
077|002|And those that storm with turbulence.
077|003|And those that scatter far and wide.
077|004|And those that differentiate distinctly.
077|005|And those that deliver a reminder.
077|006|Excusing or warning.
077|007|What you’re promised is to come.
077|008|When the stars are obliterated.
077|009|And the sky is fractured.
077|010|And the mountains are blown away.
077|011|And when the messengers’ time has been appointed.
077|012|To what Day was it deferred?
077|013|To the Day of Sorting.
077|014|And what will make you understand what the Day of Sorting is?
077|015|Woe, on that Day, to the deniers!
077|016|Didn’t We annihilate the first ones?
077|017|Then We followed them up with the later ones.
077|018|Such is how We deal with the transgressors.
077|019|Woe, on that Day, to the deceivers!
077|020|Didn’t We create you from a base fluid?
077|021|And placed it in a secure repository?
077|022|For a specific period?
077|023|We determined, so how excellent We are at determining.
077|024|Woe, on that Day, to the forgers!
077|025|Didn’t We make the earth a receptacle?
077|026|For the living and for the dead?
077|027|And placed within it towering mountains, and provided you with fresh water to drink?
077|028|Woe, on that Day, to the rejecters!
077|029|Proceed to what you used to deny.
077|030|Proceed to a shadow in three columns.
077|031|It neither has shade nor can it shield from the flames.
077|032|It throws up sparks as towers.
077|033|As if they were yellowish camels.
077|034|Woe, on that Day, to the falsifiers!
077|035|This is the Day when they won’t speak.
077|036|And they won’t be permitted to present excuses.
077|037|Woe, on that Day, to the schemers!
077|038|This is the Day of Separation; We gathered you and the ancients.
077|039|If you have any strategy, then use it against Me.
077|040|Woe to the disbelievers on that Day!
077|041|The righteous will be amidst shades and springs.
077|042|And fruits of their choosing.
077|043|“Eat and drink in satisfaction for what you used to do.”
077|044|Such is how We reward the doers of good.
077|045|Woe, on that Day, to the deniers!
077|046|“Eat and enjoy yourselves a little; indeed, you are guilty.”
077|047|Woe, on that Day, to the rejecters!
077|048|And when it was said to them, “Bow down,” they didn’t bow down.
077|049|Woe, on that Day, to those who refuse!
077|050|Then in what statement after this will they believe?
078|001|What are they asking one another about?
078|002|About the extraordinary news.
078|003|That they are in disagreement over.
078|004|Indeed, they will surely know.
078|005|Indeed, once again, they will surely know.
078|006|Didn’t We make the earth a cradle?
078|007|And the mountains as pegs?
078|008|And created you in pairs?
078|009|And made your sleep for rest?
078|010|And made the night a cover?
078|011|And made the day for livelihood?
078|012|And built above you seven firmaments?
078|013|And placed therein a shining lamp?
078|014|And sent down, from the rain-clouds, abundant water?
078|015|To produce with it grains and plants.
078|016|And lush, luxuriant gardens?
078|017|The Day of Sorting is an appointed time.
078|018|The Day the Trumpet will be blown, and you will come in crowds.
078|019|And the sky is opened, and it becomes gateways.
078|020|And the mountains will be set in motion, becoming a mirage.
078|021|Hell is a lurking threat.
078|022|A destination for the oppressors.
078|023|Where they will remain for eons.
078|024|They won’t taste therein any coolness or drink.
078|025|Except boiling water and freezing cold hail.
078|026|An appropriate recompense.
078|027|For they were not expecting accountability.
078|028|And they denied Our verses with vehement denial.
078|029|But all things We’ve accounted for in writing.
078|030|So taste; We will only increase your suffering.
078|031|For the righteous, however, there is triumph.
078|032|Gardens and vineyards.
078|033|And companions of equal age.
078|034|And a full cup.
078|035|They won’t hear therein any vain talk or sinful speech.
078|036|A reward from your Lord, a generous gift as calculated.
078|037|The Lord of the heavens and the earth, and what’s between them, the Most Merciful. None can converse with Him.
078|038|On the Day when the Spirit and the angels will stand in rows, they won’t speak, except for one whom the Most Merciful allows, who will say what’s right.
078|039|That is the Day of Truth. So whoever wills, let them seek a way to his Lord.
078|040|We have warned you of a near punishment—the Day when a person will see what his hands have forwarded, and the unbeliever will say, “I wish I were mere dust!”
079|001|By those who pull forcefully.
079|002|And those who retrieve gently.
079|003|And those who glide serenely.
079|004|And those who race swiftly.
079|005|And those who arrange each matter.
079|006|On the Day when the Trembler shudders.
079|007|And is followed by the Successor.
079|008|On that Day, hearts will be pounding.
079|009|Their eyes downcast in humility.
079|010|They question, “Are we to be restored from the graves?
079|011|Even after we’ve become decayed bones?”
079|012|They say, “That would be a useless return.”
079|013|Yet, it will only be a single jolt.
079|014|And suddenly, they will be fully awake.
079|015|Did the story of Moses reach you?
079|016|When his Lord called to him, in the sacred valley of Tuwa.
079|017|“Go to Pharaoh, indeed, he has transgressed.”
079|018|And ask, “Are you inclined to purify yourself?
079|019|And I may guide you to your Lord, so you would fear.”
079|020|Then he showed him the supreme sign.
079|021|But he denied and disobeyed.
079|022|Then he turned his back, striving.
079|023|He summoned and announced.
079|024|And he declared, “I am your supreme lord!”
079|025|So, Allah seized him in exemplary punishment in the Last and the First.
079|026|In this is a lesson for those who are cautious.
079|027|Are you harder to create, or is the sky that He built?
079|028|He raised its height and proportioned it.
079|029|He dimmed its night and brought out its morning.
079|030|After that, He spread the earth.
079|031|From it, He brought forth its water and its pasture.
079|032|And the mountains, He anchored.
079|033|As enjoyment for you and your livestock.
079|034|When the great overthrow arrives.
079|035|The Day when man will remember his efforts.
079|036|And Hellfire will be exposed for all to see.
079|037|But as for him who transgressed.
079|038|And preferred the life of this world.
079|039|Hellfire will be the dwelling.
079|040|But as for him who feared the position of his Lord, and restrained the soul from desires.
079|041|Paradise will be the sanctuary.
079|042|They ask you about the Hour, “When is its arrival?”
079|043|In what position are you to mention its date?
079|044|To your Lord alone, is its ultimate knowledge.
079|045|You are only a warner for those who fear it.
079|046|On the day they see it, it will be as though they had only lingered an evening or a morning.
080|001|He frowned and turned away.
080|002|Because the blind man approached him.
080|003|And how could you possibly know? Maybe he would purify himself.
080|004|Or he might be reminded, and the reminder would benefit him.
080|005|Yet, as for the one who is indifferent.
080|006|You devoted your full attention.
080|007|Even though you bear no responsibility if he fails to achieve purification.
080|008|But as for the one who came to you striving earnestly.
080|009|Brimming with awe and humility.
080|010|You were neglectful of him.
080|011|No. This is a reminder.
080|012|So, let whoever wills, take it to heart.
080|013|On esteemed pages.
080|014|Exalted and sanctified.
080|015|By the hands of scribes.
080|016|Noble and virtuous.
080|017|Perish man! How ungrateful he is!
080|018|From what did He create him?
080|019|From a drop, He created him, and then proportioned him.
080|020|Then He smoothed the path for him.
080|021|Then He causes him to die, and then He buries him.
080|022|Then, at His will, He will resurrect him.
080|023|Yet, he didn’t fulfill what He commanded him.
080|024|Let man contemplate his food.
080|025|How We pour down rain in torrents.
080|026|Then, We burst the earth in clefts.
080|027|And cause diverse grains to sprout.
080|028|And grapes and vegetables.
080|029|And olives and dates.
080|030|And lush gardens.
080|031|And fruits and pastures.
080|032|For you and your livestock to enjoy.
080|033|Then, when the Shattering Blast comes.
080|034|On that Day, a person will flee from his brother.
080|035|And from his mother and father.
080|036|And from his girlfriend and his children.
080|037|Each one of them, on that day, will have enough preoccupations of his own.
080|038|Faces on that Day will be bright.
080|039|Laughing, rejoicing.
080|040|Other faces, on that day, will have upon them dust.
080|041|Darkness will cover them.
080|042|These are the unbelievers, the wicked.
081|001|When the sun is wrapped up.
081|002|When the stars are darkened.
081|003|When the mountains are set in motion.
081|004|When the relationships are severed.
081|005|When the beasts are gathered together.
081|006|When the seas are set aflame.
081|007|When the souls are paired.
081|008|When the female, buried alive, is asked.
081|009|For what sin was she put to death?
081|010|When the pages are spread open.
081|011|When the sky is peeled away.
081|012|When Hell is set ablaze.
081|013|And when Paradise is brought near.
081|014|Each soul will know what it has prepared.
081|015|So, I swear by the receding stars.
081|016|The moving ones that vanish.
081|017|And by the night as it settles.
081|018|And by the dawn as it breathes.
081|019|Indeed, it is the speech of a noble messenger.
081|020|Possessed of strength, secure with the Lord of the Throne.
081|021|Obeyed and trustworthy.
081|022|Your friend isn’t insane.
081|023|He saw him on the clear horizon.
081|024|Nor is he withholding knowledge of the unseen.
081|025|It is not the word of an outcast devil.
081|026|So, where are you going?
081|027|This is a message to all of humanity.
081|028|For whoever among you wills to be upright.
081|029|And you won’t will, unless Allah, the Lord of all Universes, wills.
082|001|When the sky fractures.
082|002|And the stars scatter.
082|003|And the seas erupt.
082|004|And the graves are unearthed.
082|005|Every soul will know what it forwarded and what it deferred.
082|006|O man, what deceived you from your generous Lord?
082|007|He who created you, shaped you, and proportioned you.
082|008|In whatever form He willed, He assembled you.
082|009|Rather, you deny Judgment.
082|010|Even though there are protectors over you.
082|011|Noble scribes.
082|012|They know all that you do.
082|013|The righteous will be in bliss.
082|014|And the wicked will be in Hell.
082|015|They will enter it on the Day of Recompense.
082|016|And they won’t be absent from it.
082|017|What will make you understand what the Day of Recompense is?
082|018|Then, what will make you comprehend what the Day of Recompense is?
082|019|It’s the day when no soul possesses anything for another soul, and the command on that day is entirely for Allah.
083|001|Woe to those who defraud.
083|002|Those who, when they take a measure from people, demand it in full.
083|003|Yet, when they are the ones measuring or weighing for others, they give less than what’s due.
083|004|Don’t they think that they’ll be resurrected?
083|005|On a tremendous Day?
083|006|The Day when all humanity will stand before the Lord of the universes?
083|007|No! The record of the wicked is in Sijjeen.
083|008|And what will make you understand what Sijjeen is?
083|009|A numerical document.
083|010|Woe, on that Day, to the deniers.
083|011|Those who deny Judgement Day.
083|012|None denies it except every sinful transgressor.
083|013|When Our verses are conveyed to him, he says, “Legends of the ancients.”
083|014|Their hearts are rusted by what they’ve been earning.
083|015|Surely, on that Day, they will be veiled from their Lord.
083|016|Then, they’ll be thrust into the searing flames.
083|017|Then it will be said: “This is what you used to deny.”
083|018|However, the record of the righteous is in Ellyeen.
083|019|And what will make you understand what Elleyoon is?
083|020|A numerical document.
083|021|Witnessed by those drawn near.
083|022|Indeed, the virtuous will be in pleasure.
083|023|On adorned couches, observing.
083|024|You will recognize on their faces the radiance of bliss.
083|025|They will be given to drink from a pure, sealed wine.
083|026|The seal of it is musk. For this, let the competitors compete.
083|027|Its mixture is from Tasneem.
083|028|A spring from which those brought near drink.
083|029|Those who committed crimes used to laugh at those who believed.
083|030|And when they passed by them, they would wink at each other.
083|031|Upon returning to their families, they would return jubilantly.
083|032|Upon seeing them, they would say, “These have really gone astray.”
083|033|But they were not sent as keepers over them.
083|034|Today, those who believed are laughing at the unbelievers.
083|035|On thrones, observing.
083|036|Are the unbelievers not paid for what they used to do?
084|001|When the sky fractures.
084|002|And obeys its Lord, as it must.
084|003|And when the earth is expanded.
084|004|And casts out whatever in it, and empties itself.
084|005|And it obeys its Lord, as it should.
084|006|O man, you are laboring towards your Lord, and you will surely encounter Him.
084|007|As for the one who is given his record in his right hand.
084|008|He will face an easy accounting.
084|009|And will return to his family happily.
084|010|But as for the one who is given his record behind his back.
084|011|He will call for annihilation.
084|012|And will be thrust into a roaring inferno.
084|013|He was once joyful among his family.
084|014|He thought he would never return.
084|015|Yet, his Lord was watchful over him.
084|016|So, I swear by the twilight’s glow.
084|017|And by the night, and all it encloses.
084|018|And by the moon, when it becomes full.
084|019|You will ascend from stage to stage.
084|020|So why, then, do they not believe?
084|021|And when the Quran is read to them, they don’t prostrate?
084|022|But those who disbelieve are in denial.
084|023|And Allah certainly knows what they are hiding.
084|024|So, give them the news of a severe punishment.
084|025|But for those who believe and do righteous deeds, theirs is an unending reward.
085|001|By the sky with the constellations.
085|002|And by the Promised Day.
085|003|And by the witness and what is witnessed.
085|004|Perished were the companions of the ditch.
085|005|With the intensely fueled fire.
085|006|While they were seated around it.
085|007|Witnessing what they were doing to the believers.
085|008|They resented them simply because they believed in Allah, the Almighty, the Worthy of Praise.
085|009|To whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth. Allah is ever watchful over everything.
085|010|Those who persecute the believing men and women without repenting, will have the punishment of Hell, and they will have the punishment of the Burning Fire.
085|011|However, those who believe and do righteous deeds will have gardens through which rivers flow—this is the great success.
085|012|Your Lord’s onslaught is severe.
085|013|It is He who initiates and repeats.
085|014|And He is the Forgiving, the Loving.
085|015|The Owner of the majestic throne.
085|016|The Doer of whatever He intends.
085|017|Did the accounts of the soldiers reach you?
085|018|Of Pharaoh and Thamud?
085|019|Yet, those who disbelieve are in denial.
085|020|But Allah surrounds them from all directions.
085|021|It’s a Noble Quran.
085|022|In a well-guarded tablet.
086|001|By the sky and the pulsar.
086|002|And what will explain to you what the pulsar is?
086|003|It’s the piercing star.
086|004|There is no soul without a Protector over it.
086|005|Let man consider what he was created from.
086|006|He was created from a gushing fluid.
086|007|Emerging from between the backbone and the ribs.
086|008|He is surely able to return him.
086|009|On the Day when the secrets are exposed.
086|010|He will have no power, nor any helper.
086|011|By the sky with the return.
086|012|And the earth that splits open.
086|013|It’s a decisive statement.
086|014|And it’s not a joke.
086|015|They are plotting a plot.
086|016|And I am planning a plan.
086|017|So, give the unbelievers some time; let them be for a while.
087|001|Praise the name of your Lord, the Most High.
087|002|He who created and proportioned.
087|003|He who determined and then guided.
087|004|And who brings out the pasture.
087|005|Then reduces it to withered stubble.
087|006|We will make you read, so don’t forget.
087|007|Except what Allah should will. He knows the manifest and the hidden.
087|008|We will ease you towards ease.
087|009|So, remind if the reminder benefits.
087|010|The reverent will be mindful.
087|011|But the most wretched will avoid it.
087|012|Who will enter the Gigantic Fire.
087|013|In which he will neither die nor live.
087|014|Successful is he who purifies himself.
087|015|And mentions the name of his Lord, and prays.
087|016|But you prioritize the worldly life.
087|017|But the Hereafter is better and more enduring.
087|018|This is in the earlier Scriptures.
087|019|The Scriptures of Abraham and Moses.
088|001|Did you hear of the Overwhelming Event?
088|002|Some faces on that day will be humbled.
088|003|Laboring and exhausted.
088|004|Exposed to a fiercely blazing fire.
088|005|Made to drink from a flaming spring.
088|006|Their only food will be bitter thorns.
088|007|Which neither nourishes nor satisfies hunger.
088|008|Other faces on that day will be joyful.
088|009|Satisfied with their endeavors.
088|010|In a high and lofty paradise.
088|011|In it, you will hear no nonsense.
088|012|Within it, a spring will flow.
088|013|Therein, are raised couches.
088|014|With cups set at hand.
088|015|And cushions lined up.
088|016|And carpets spread out.
088|017|Don’t they look at the camels, and how they were created?
088|018|And the sky, how it is raised?
088|019|And the mountains, how they are anchored?
088|020|And the earth, how it is spread out?
088|021|So remind, for you are simply a reminder.
088|022|You are not a controller over them.
088|023|Yet whoever turns away and disbelieves.
088|024|Allah will punish him with the greatest punishment.
088|025|To Us is their return.
088|026|Then, upon Us is their judgment.
089|001|By the dawn.
089|002|And ten nights.
089|003|And by the even and the odd.
089|004|And the night as it passes.
089|005|Is there in this an oath for a man of sense?
089|006|Didn’t you see how your Lord dealt with Aad?
089|007|Iram of the pillars.
089|008|The likes of which had never been created in the lands.
089|009|And Thamud, who carved out the rocks in the valley?
089|010|And Pharaoh, owner of the stakes?
089|011|All of them transgressed within their lands.
089|012|Spreading rampant corruption and chaos.
089|013|Therefore, your Lord poured upon them a whip of punishment.
089|014|Your Lord lies in ambush.
089|015|As for man: when his Lord tests him, honors him, and blesses him, he says, “My Lord has honored me.”
089|016|Yet, when He tests him and restricts his provision, he says, “My Lord has humiliated me.”
089|017|But no! You don’t honor the orphan.
089|018|And you don’t encourage one another to feed the poor.
089|019|And you devour inheritance with all greed.
089|020|And you love wealth with vehement love.
089|021|When the earth is leveled, pounded, and pulverized.
089|022|And your Lord comes and the angels, rank upon rank.
089|023|On that Day, Hell will be presented. On that Day, man will remember, but how will remembrance avail him?
089|024|He will say, “Oh, I wish I had prepared for my life!”
089|025|On that Day, none will punish as His punishment.
089|026|And none will shackle as His shackles.
089|027|But as for you, O tranquil soul.
089|028|Return to your Lord, pleased and pleasing.
089|029|Join My servants!
089|030|And enter My Paradise!
090|001|Nay, I swear by this city.
090|002|And you are a dweller in this city.
090|003|And by a parent and what he fathered.
090|004|We created man in struggle.
090|005|Does he think that no one can overpower him?
090|006|He boasts, “I have squandered a great wealth.”
090|007|Does he think that none sees him?
090|008|Didn’t We give him two eyes?
090|009|And a tongue and two lips?
090|010|And We guided him to the two diverging ways?
090|011|Yet he didn’t attempt the Ascent.
090|012|And what will make you comprehend what theAscent is?
090|013|It is the freeing of a slave.
090|014|Or providing food on a day of widespread hunger.
090|015|To a related orphan.
090|016|Or to a destitute in misery.
090|017|Then, he becomes of those who believe and advise one another to patience and compassion.
090|018|These are the companions of happiness.
090|019|However, those who deny Our revelations are the companions of misery.
090|020|Upon them is a Sealed Fire.
091|001|By the sun and its brilliance.
091|002|And the moon, as it follows it.
091|003|And the day, as it displays it.
091|004|And the night, as it covers it.
091|005|And the sky, and He who built it.
091|006|And the earth, and He who spread it out.
091|007|And the soul, and He who proportioned it.
091|008|Then He inspired it with its wickedness and its righteousness.
091|009|Successful is the one who purifies it.
091|010|And doomed is the one who taints it.
091|011|Thamud, in their transgression, denied.
091|012|When the most wretched amongst them was roused.
091|013|The messenger of Allah said to them: “Allah’s she-camel, let her drink.”
091|014|But they rejected him and they hamstrung her. So their Lord, on account of their sin, struck them with a punishment, and He leveled it.
091|015|And He doesn’t fear its repercussions.
092|001|By the night as it covers.
092|002|And by the day, as it reveals.
092|003|And by He who created the male and the female.
092|004|Surely, your endeavors are diverse.
092|005|As for the one who gives and is righteous.
092|006|And who affirms the ultimate goodness.
092|007|We will pave for him the path of ease.
092|008|But as for he who is stingy and indifferent.
092|009|And denies the ultimate goodness.
092|010|We will pave for him the path of hardship.
092|011|And his wealth won’t avail him when he plummets.
092|012|It’s upon Us to guide.
092|013|And to Us belong the Last and the First.
092|014|I have warned you of a blazing Fire.
092|015|None will burn in except the wicked.
092|016|He who denies and turns away.
092|017|But the righteous will avoid it.
092|018|He who gives of what he has, purifying himself.
092|019|Not expecting to be repaid by anyone.
092|020|Solely seeking the countenance of his Lord, the Most High.
092|021|And he will be satisfied.
093|001|By the late morning light.
093|002|And by the night as it settles.
093|003|Your Lord didn’t abandon you, nor is He displeased.
093|004|The Hereafter is better for you than the First.
093|005|And your Lord will give you, and you will be satisfied.
093|006|Didn’t He find you an orphan, and He provided a home?
093|007|And He found you lost, and He offered guidance?
093|008|And He found you in need, and He granted sufficiency?
093|009|Therefore, don’t treat the orphan with harshness.
093|010|And don’t repulse the one who asks.
093|011|But speak of the blessings of your Lord.
094|001|Didn’t We soothe your heart for you?
094|002|And We removed from you your burden.
094|003|That weighed heavily on your back.
094|004|And We raised high for you your reputation.
094|005|Surely, with hardship comes ease.
094|006|Certainly, with difficulty, there is relief.
094|007|Once you have completed your tasks, turn to devotion.
094|008|And to your Lord direct your longing.
095|001|By the fig and the olive.
095|002|And Mount Sinai.
095|003|And this secure city.
095|004|We created man in the best design.
095|005|Then, We returned him to the lowest of the low.
095|006|Except for those who believe and do righteous deeds, they will have an unending reward.
095|007|What then makes you deny the Recompense?
095|008|Isn’t Allah the Wisest of judges?
096|001|Read, in the name of your Lord who created.
096|002|Created man from a clinging clot.
096|003|Read, and your Lord is the Most Generous.
096|004|He who taught by the pen.
096|005|Taught man what he knew not.
096|006|Indeed, man transgresses.
096|007|When he sees himself as self-sufficient.
096|008|Yet, to your Lord is the return.
096|009|Did you see the one who forbids?
096|010|A servant when he prays?
096|011|Did you see if he is upon guidance?
096|012|Or advocates righteousness?
096|013|Didn’t you see how he denies and turns away?
096|014|Doesn’t he know that Allah sees?
096|015|No indeed! If he does not desist, We will drag him by the forelock.
096|016|A lying, sinful forelock.
096|017|Let him call his helpers.
096|018|We will call the Infernal Guards.
096|019|No! Don’t obey him, but instead, prostrate and draw close.
097|001|We revealed it on the Night of Destiny.
097|002|And what can make you know what’s the Night of Destiny?
097|003|The Night of Destiny is better than a thousand months.
097|004|During this night, the angels and the Spirit descend, by their Lord’s permission, with every command.
097|005|Peace it is, until the rise of dawn.
098|001|Those who disbelieved among the People of the Scripture and the polytheists were not separated until clear evidence came to them.
098|002|A Messenger from Allah, reciting purified pages.
098|003|Within them are upright teachings.
098|004|Those given the Scripture didn’t become divided until after the clear evidence came to them.
098|005|They were only commanded to worship Allah, devoting their religion to Him alone, uphold prayer, and give charity. That is the correct religion.
098|006|Those who disbelieved among the People of the Scripture and the polytheists will abide eternally in the fire of Hell. They are the vilest of all beings.
098|007|However, those who believe and perform righteous deeds are the best of all beings.
098|008|Their reward with their Lord is Gardens of Eternity, through which rivers flow, where they will reside forever. Allah is pleased with them, and they are pleased with Him. That is for whoever reveres his Lord.
099|001|When the earth is shaken with its earthquake.
099|002|And the earth casts out its burdens.
099|003|And man says, “What’s the matter with it?”
099|004|On that day, it will report its chronicles.
099|005|Because your Lord will have inspired it.
099|006|On that Day, the people will emerge in scattered groups to be shown their deeds.
099|007|Whoever has done an atom’s weight of good will see it.
099|008|And whoever has done an atom’s weight of evil will see it.
100|001|By the gallopers snorting.
100|002|Striking sparks of fire.
100|003|Charging in the morning.
100|004|Stirring up therein a cloud of dust.
100|005|And plunging thereby into the center.
100|006|Indeed, man is to his Lord ungrateful.
100|007|And to that, he himself is a witness.
100|008|And he is passionate in his love for good things.
100|009|Does he not know? When the graves’ contents are scattered around.
100|010|And what’s in the hearts is exposed.
100|011|Their Lord, on that Day, will have perfect Knowledge of them.
101|001|The Shocker.
101|002|What is the Shocker?
101|003|And what will make you understand what the Shocker is?
101|004|On that day, the people will be like scattered moths.
101|005|And the mountains will resemble carded wool.
101|006|As for him whose scales are heavy.
101|007|He will experience a life of contentment.
101|008|But as for he whose scales are light.
101|009|His mother will be an Abyss.
101|010|And what could explain to you what that is?
101|011|An intensely hot fire.
102|001|The quest for increase distracts you.
102|002|Until you visit the graveyards.
102|003|Indeed, you will come to know.
102|004|Surely, you will definitely come to realize.
102|005|Certainly, if only you knew with absolute certainty.
102|006|You will definitely see Hellfire.
102|007|Then, you will surely see it with the eye of reality.
102|008|Then, on that Day, you will be questioned about the pleasures.
103|001|By Time.
103|002|The human being is at a loss.
103|003|Except for those who believe, do good deeds, encourage truth, and recommend patience.
104|001|Woe to every slanderer and backbiter.
104|002|He who gathers wealth and counts it over.
104|003|Thinking that his wealth will eternalize him.
104|004|No indeed! He will be thrust into the Crusher.
104|005|And what will make you understand what the Crusher is?
104|006|It is the kindled fire of Allah.
104|007|Which leaps up over the hearts.
104|008|It will be shut upon them.
104|009|In extended pillars.
105|001|Didn’t you see how your Lord dealt with the People of the Elephant?
105|002|Didn’t He make their plot in confusion?
105|003|He sent flocks of birds against them.
105|004|Pelting them with stones of hard clay.
105|005|And He made them like eaten-up stubble.
106|001|For the accustomed security of the Quraysh.
106|002|Their habitual winter and summer journeys.
106|003|Let them worship the Lord of this House.
106|004|Who fed them against hunger, and made them safe from fear.
107|001|Didn’t you see the one who denies the religion?
107|002|It is he who repulses the orphan.
107|003|And doesn’t encourage the feeding of the needy.
107|004|So woe to those who pray.
107|005|Those who are unmindful in their prayers.
107|006|Those who make a show.
107|007|And withhold assistance.
108|001|We’ve given you abundance.
108|002|So, pray to your Lord and sacrifice.
108|003|He who hates you, he will be cut off.
109|001|Say, “O unbelievers.
109|002|I don’t worship what you worship.
109|003|Nor are you worshipers of what I worship.
109|004|Nor will I worship what you worship.
109|005|Nor will you be worshippers of what I worship.
109|006|For you is your religion, and for me is mine.”
110|001|When Allah’s assistance and victory come.
110|002|And you see people entering Allah’s religion in multitudes.
110|003|Then, glorify the praises of your Lord, and seek His forgiveness. He is ever accepting of repentance.
111|001|Perish the hands of Abu Lahab, and perish he.
111|002|Neither his wealth nor his earnings will avail him.
111|003|He will enter a flaming Fire.
111|004|And his wife, the carrier of firewood.
111|005|Around her neck is a rope of palm fiber.
112|001|Say, “He is Allah, One and only.
112|002|Allah, the Eternal, the Absolute.
112|003|He neither begets nor is He begotten.
112|004|And there is none comparable or equivalent to Him.”
113|001|Say, “I take refuge in the Lord of Daybreak.
113|002|From the evil of what He created.
113|003|And from the evil of the darkness when it settles.
113|004|And from the evil of those who blow on knots.
113|005|And from the evil of the envier when he envies.”
114|001|Say, “I take refuge in the Lord of humanity.
114|002|The King of humanity.
114|003|The God of humanity.
114|004|From the evil of the retreating whisperer.
114|005|Who whispers into the hearts of people.
114|006|From among jinn and humans.”
